The world economy##NewPara##The month s information about the world economy contained few surprises. In the United States, GDP was now estimated to have increased by % in the third quarter, a little faster than in the advance estimate, and consumption had increased at the same rate. Business and consumer confidence had improved; the survey indicators from the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) had picked up, both in manufacturing and, more substantially, in non-manufacturing; production of information, communications and technology (ICT) goods had increased again in October, and was about % above its level a year earlier; and new orders for non- defence capital goods had picked up. Industrial production had, however, weakened again and the ISM manufacturing survey balance was below ; investment was still weak; and the levels of manufacturing and consumer confidence, though higher, had not yet recovered to levels seen earlier in the year. The dollar yield curve was now quite steeply upward-sloping at shorter maturities, reflecting in part the change to a neutral bias in the Federal Open Market Committee s statement accompanying their November interest rate decision. Credit conditions generally were somewhat easier in wholesale markets and spreads had narrowed. The market was more receptive to debt issuance and there had been fewer credit rating downgrades, though the Federal Reserve Board survey of loan officers reported that conditions for smaller corporate borrowers had tightened modestly in the past quarter.##NewPara##The Committee s central view remained that US output growth in the fourth quarter would be somewhat slower than in the third. Looking further ahead, the prospects for recovery were unchanged. Though investment had not yet started to increase, the relatively shorter lives of ICT capital goods suggested that the investment cycle might now be shorter than in the past. It would in any case not be surprising if investment were to follow, rather than lead, the upswing, and its return to growth would     be a clear sign that recovery was firmly established.##NewPara##The Committee noted that Consensus forecasts, which had previously been rather stronger than those underlying the Inflation Report projections, had weakened and were, in the November release, a little lower than the Committee s central view in the November Report. It was agreed that these differences might reflect the time at which the various forecasts had been made and, in particular, their timing relative to the autumn recovery in equity prices and the somewhat stronger US data released since October. Some may have been completed before the Committee s own most recent projection.##NewPara##In the euro area, growth remained subdued. Growth in the second quarter had been revised down a little; the first estimate of growth in the third quarter was, at .%, slightly weaker than the Committee s central expectation. Within that overall picture, the contribution of final domestic demand to third-quarter growth in the euro area as a whole was a little stronger than had been expected. This afforded some comfort that the pace of growth might start to pick up in the coming months.  However, retail sales growth had eased in September and consumer confidence was falling. In Germany, the rate of unemployment had increased to % and the IFO index had fallen further in November; and France now seemed to be among the euro-area countries showing signs of weaker growth. Market expectations were that the ECB would reduce interest rates, most probably by  basis points, at its meeting on  December.##NewPara##On the basis of new data, GDP growth in Japan had now been positive and increasing for the first three quarters of this year. These data were volatile and there was, in particular, considerable uncertainty about the consumption data. But the rapid growth in exports to other Asian countries this year suggested that there might nevertheless be substance in these new estimates and it was encouraging that signs of recovery in Japan were now starting to emerge.##NewPara##International financial markets had been more stable during November. The main stock market indices were little changed on the month, and volatility had fallen: whereas, in October, the volatility implied by options prices had been higher in the near term than at six month maturities, the volatility profile was now flatter and reflected the generally calmer market conditions. Exchange rates had moved rather more during the month than over the month as a whole. Sterling had ended it a little stronger in effective rate terms.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, household borrowing continued to grow strongly. The twelve-month growth rate of M lending to households had increased to just under % in October;  the corresponding rate of growth of total secured lending to individuals had risen to just under %   the highest rate since ; and mortgage equity withdrawal in the third quarter was provisionally estimated to have been .% of personal disposable income, up from .% in the second quarter. This was consistent with the continued rise in consumers  confidence about their own financial situation and the generally robust consumption picture. Household deposits were also growing quite rapidly, at just over % in the year to October.   This might in part reflect as yet unspent funds realised from  equity withdrawn from the housing market.##NewPara##Housing market developments had not changed substantially since the Committee s previous meeting. It was noted that the main upward pressure on house prices now seemed to be coming from the lower end of the market. The pressure had moved away from London and the South East to other regions. This might in part reflect a shift of buy-to-let demand from the London market, where returns were increasingly reported to be disappointing, to other areas of the country. But the evidence did not support any one explanation of recent house price movements, and there was substantial local variation in price pressures.##NewPara##The Chancellor s Pre-Budget Report had projected higher levels of Government borrowing this year, and in both  and , than had been expected at the time of the main Budget statement earlier in the year. This was unsurprising, given the slower-than-expected pace of growth this year, and the Committee noted that the fiscal rules were still expected to be comfortably met. There did not, therefore, seem to be any immediate pressure on the Government to change its fiscal stance, which remained one which would, helpfully, support domestic demand over the next year or two.##NewPara##Two longer-term issues were noted. First, a significant part of the unexpected weakness in government revenues was attributed to the current depressed level of profitability in the financial sector. This might well (as was implied by the Treasury s fiscal projections) be reversed, as output returned to trend. But it was also possible that profitability in that sector had been exceptionally high in the late s, so that a part of the recent fall in tax revenues from this sector might persist. The assumptions underlying the Pre-Budget Report were more cautious than those in the Budget itself, as##NewPara##they were based on the current lower level of equity prices. But some cuts in the cost base of financial sector firms were also implied, if profitability was to be restored to previous levels.##NewPara##Second, the Treasury s projections incorporated new estimates of UK population growth, both in the past (reflecting the results of the  Census) and looking forward (reflecting revised projections by the Government Actuary s Department). The downward revisions to past population data had led, mechanically, to somewhat faster measured trend productivity growth in the past. This was projected to continue in the years ahead. The Treasury had, as usual, adopted a more cautious assumption about trend output growth in its fiscal projections than the central assumption in its economic forecast.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The estimate of GDP growth in the third quarter was revised up, by . percentage points, to .% in the November data release. The main news was in the components, with consumption growth, at .%, much stronger than had been expected at the time of the November Inflation Report; and investment much weaker, falling for the seventh quarter in succession. This continued the recent pattern of stronger-than-expected consumption growth and weaker-than-expected investment.##NewPara##Early indications of consumption in the fourth quarter were quite robust: retail sales volumes increased by .% in October, and the CBI distributive trades survey suggested that they had remained strong in November. Household borrowing, consumer confidence and housing market information supported the view that consumption would continue to grow strongly in the fourth quarter.##NewPara##It was difficult to know how to assess the weak business investment outturn. Investment growth could vary substantially, for relatively small changes in firms  desired capital stock; and, as a share of GDP, it was unclear whether the nominal share or the constant price share offered the better guide to the sustainable level of investment. The price of investment goods had been falling relative to that of output as a whole for many years, and it was therefore not surprising that the constant price share had been on a rising trend, although it had been falling since the start of the slowdown in . The direction in which the nominal share would move in response to relative price changes depended, however, on the ease with which capital could be substituted for labour. The nominal share was currently below its long-run average. It was noted also that the fall in manufacturing investment was not surprising, given the weakness in output: the puzzle was that service sector investment was weak.##NewPara##Corporate balance sheets seemed in general to have strengthened, leaving firms better placed to increase investment expenditure if expectations of future demand were to strengthen. The special survey of investment by the Bank s regional Agents suggested that weak external demand was a key factor.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Employment, as measured by the Labour Force Survey (LFS), had fallen in the third quarter, and unemployment on the LFS measure had increased to .%   in contrast to the slight fall embodied in the projections for the November Inflation Report. But claimant unemployment continued to fall slowly. It therefore seemed unlikely that the earlier-than-expected pick-up in the LFS measure of unemployment signalled more rapid increases further out, or that the increases in unemployment were yet sufficient to dampen the pace of consumption growth.##NewPara##Earnings growth remained stable overall, at an annual rate of a little below %. But the pattern of growth in public sector pay, which had risen sharply to nearly % in the second quarter of  and fallen to % a year later but was now back to around %, was puzzling: it did not obviously fit with Government strategy for recruiting and retaining public sector staff. Part of the explanation could be timing factors, including the threshold payments to teachers last year and the delay in this year s local authorities pay settlement. The latter would continue to affect the data well into next year. More rapid public sector earnings growth could have a direct effect on RPIX inflation through Council Tax, and indirect effects if it led to higher private sector settlements. But the labour market had eased, despite the continuing increase in public sector employment.  So concerns about possible inflationary pressures from public sector earnings growth would be less acute.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##RPIX inflation was .% in the year to October, as had been expected. It was likely to move above target in November, as last October s fall in petrol prices would drop out of the annual comparison and the continuing rapid pace of house price inflation would add to the contribution to the index from housing depreciation. Though spot oil prices were some % higher (in sterling terms) than at the Committee s previous meeting, they were lower on average in November than had been expected at the time of the Committee s November projections, and futures prices had changed very##NewPara##little further out. The net effect would be to reduce inflation a little, relative to the Inflation Report##NewPara##profile, in the coming months, but to raise it further out.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The monthly poll of economists by Reuters showed that none of them expected a change in the repo rate this month.  This was broadly consistent with what was implied by market forward rates.  The short end of the sterling money market curve had moved up by about  basis points on the month. This might reflect in part the market view of the implications for UK interest rates of the November reduction in US interest rates and of the expected reduction this month in euro-area rates.##NewPara##The Committee noted the lingering perception in some quarters that its decisions either were, or should be, directed at achieving greater house price stability. They unanimously reaffirmed their view that this would be inappropriate, given the Committee s remit: the price stability target set by the Chancellor was specified in terms of retail price inflation, as measured by RPIX, and not house prices (or indeed any other asset price). House price movements were, nonetheless, a potentially important influence on the prospect for inflation. The policy judgment would take them into account alongside other potential influences on inflation in deciding on the most appropriate setting of interest rates.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee agreed that the news on the month was limited and did not materially affect the projections for inflation and output growth included in the November Inflation Report. Though there were one or two weaker indicators from the United States, the month s data and survey information about the US economy had on balance been mildly encouraging. Economic news from the euro area was somewhat weaker, though comfort was taken by some members from the stronger-than-expected indicators of domestic demand. There was also an expectation of imminent monetary policy action to support recovery there. And there had been more positive indicators from Japan. Financial markets around the world seemed to have stabilised, at least for the present, and uncertainties from that source accordingly to have receded somewhat. In the United Kingdom, overall growth prospects were little changed, though consumption had been stronger and investment weaker than expected. There were some signs of easing in the labour market, which might moderate possible concerns about public sector pay pressures. While the Pre-Budget Report suggested some uncertainties about the public finances in##NewPara##the longer term, government spending was helpfully supporting domestic demand and, on the Treasury s central view, the fiscal rules were comfortably met.##NewPara##Against this background, which continued to suggest that UK inflation would be broadly around target over the next two years and growth close to trend, the immediate policy decision depended largely on judgments about the risks to this outlook.##NewPara##A number of arguments were identified for leaving the repo rate unchanged. For most members, the central projection for inflation did not suggest that a reduction in the repo rate was necessary and the balance of risks for inflation was weighted modestly to the upside. The news on the world economy suggested that the downside risks, for example from possible retrenchment by US consumers, were no worse. While some of those arguing for no change in the repo rate felt that those risks were still present, others were more inclined to the view that they were somewhat less than they had seemed a month ago. Domestically, the persistent strength of consumption growth and the continued rapid pace of household borrowing and house price inflation suggested that there remained an upside risk to inflation from stronger-than-projected consumption growth. There were also the upside risks from next April s increases in employer and employee National Insurance Contributions, from public sector pay and from pay pressures more generally in the coming settlement round. Other arguments for no change in the repo rate were adduced, to which different weights were attached. There remained a concern that households  perceptions of their future sustainable levels of consumption might be unrealistic. This could be because they were assuming that the rapid growth of real incomes in recent years, in part the result of the terms of trade improvement, would continue; or because they looked only at the current low nominal rate of interest they paid on mortgage debt, rather##NewPara##than at the average rate they could expect to pay over the life of the loan; or because they had not fully appreciated the real burden of the debts they were accumulating in the current, low inflation, environment.  The longer any such misperceptions persisted, the greater the imbalances in the economy and the consequent downside risks to demand further ahead would become. So, for some members, an interest rate reduction now would add to uncertainty about the future path of output and inflation, and about the ability of monetary policy action to keep inflation close to target. Others were of the view that there was too much uncertainty about the magnitude or timing of the downside risks to demand from high levels of house prices or household borrowing for them to influence their current interest rate decision to any great extent.##NewPara##Some members, however, took a slightly different view of the most likely path of inflation over the next two years and assessed the risks somewhat differently, as had been the case a month ago. The outlook for the world economy and for domestic investment was in their view a little weaker than in   the Committee s central projection, and domestic inflationary pressures appeared muted. There was, prima facie, a case for a small reduction in the repo rate, to keep inflation on target.   That would  support the corporate sector and help stimulate investment. For these members, the policy issue was whether or not the risks to the outlook were a reason to change that view. A number of arguments suggested that they were not. First, growing household indebtedness would if anything add to the downward pressures further out. Second, the recent rapid growth in consumption and the associated accumulation of debt by households were a rational response to their experience of strong income growth, a robust labour market and favourable rates of interest on borrowing secured on property. So there was no reason to suppose that any abrupt adjustment in debt accumulation and consumption was likely. Third, even if high levels of household debt were seen to be a problem in the longer term, a modest reduction in interest rates would probably induce only a very modest additional increase in debt levels. Fourth, the regional pattern of house price increases suggested to these members that the current house price cycle was moving into its later stages, and a small reduction in the repo rate was therefore more likely to moderate the end of that cycle than to put renewed upward pressure on house prices. Fifth, it was younger households which were most likely to be at risk from adverse developments in the housing market. Such households were less likely, given low inflation in recent years, to be basing their decisions on an assumption that inflation would rapidly erode the real burden of their debts. They would also be more likely to experience relatively rapid income growth. Finally, loan-to-value ratios were not high by historical standards and a larger proportion of households now included two wage-earners. Both factors would moderate the impact of any adverse shock to employment; and the implications for consumption of higher debt servicing costs could if necessary be addressed by policy easing.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. Seven members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, Andrew Large, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Marian Bell and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. Christopher Allsopp and Stephen Nickell voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.