Financial markets##NewPara##The most significant of the month s developments in financial markets was the further marked fall in the US dollar exchange rate, which had depreciated by more than % against the euro   taking the euro/dollar exchange rate to its highest since the launch of the euro in January . Though this depreciation was consistent with the changes in medium-term interest rate differentials, it was possible that it also reflected mounting concerns about the sustainability of the US current account deficit.##NewPara##That deficit had earlier been associated with private sector borrowing, financed by private sector inflows, but it was now largely the counterpart of a public sector deficit, financed by inflows from overseas public sector entities   particularly Asian central banks. It was unclear how long this pattern of financing could continue. So there could be further sharp movements in the dollar exchange rate, even without the stimulus of an adverse economic event. So far, sterling had been largely unaffected (in effective rate terms) by the revaluation of the euro relative to the dollar, and remained broadly in line with the assumption underlying the November Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##Short-term interest rates had moved little over the month, in either the United Kingdom or the euro area. The market expectation was that there would be no change in UK official rates this month, and official rates were expected to remain at current levels for a while in other countries too. The Federal Open Market Committee was not expected by market participants to start increasing the Fed funds rate until May. Longer-term rates had moved up a little in both the United Kingdom and the euro area, but had fallen in the United States, for which there did not seem to be any wholly convincing explanation in terms of macroeconomic news. Equities were a little stronger in most markets, and corporate spreads had generally eased.##NewPara##Market expectations of inflation prospects in the United Kingdom had been moving steadily upwards over the past six months or so, and the Committee considered what might account for this. One possibility was that it might reflect market speculation about a change in the inflation target.  If the market expected this target to be %, on the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices measure of inflation, and also took the view that the long-run difference between this measure and RPIX inflation was around three-quarters of a percentage point, that could account for about half the apparent increase in inflation expectations. The remainder might perhaps reflect increased uncertainty about whether the inflation target would be met. An alternative explanation was simply that expectations were based on past outcomes: RPIX inflation had been somewhat below the  % target for several years, but had now been above target for a year. In any case, inflation expectations had been below the target for RPIX for a while and the recent increase had returned them to around the target rate.##NewTopic##The world economy##NewPara##The news on the world economy in the past month had generally been positive, and in some respects stronger than expected. Data for the third quarter showed that growth in the United States had been revised up, and that the euro area had been growing for the first time for a year. In addition, survey information, including that from a special survey of euro-area demand carried out by the Bank s regional Agents through their business contacts, was generally positive.##NewPara##Within the euro-area data, however, there were some less positive features. Final domestic demand growth would probably need to be a key feature of a sustainable euro-area recovery, particularly if the US dollar were to continue to weaken against the euro. But it had made no overall contribution to growth in the third quarter: the main positive contribution had come from net trade. It was also noteworthy that the past level of consumption and output in Germany had been revised down.##NewPara##In the United States, GDP was now estimated to have grown by .% in the third quarter   the fastest quarterly growth since    and business surveys pointed to a strong fourth quarter. The main issue remained the durability of this recovery. On that, too, the news was encouraging. Much of the upward revision to third-quarter growth was attributable to investment growth; and corporate profitability and confidence seemed to be recovering, so the investment recovery was likely to be sustained. The outlook for consumption was also positive: consumer confidence had improved##NewPara##somewhat, on both the main measures; there was greater optimism about labour market conditions; and non-farm payrolls had increased by nearly , in three months. Nevertheless, uncertainties remained. The improvement in the labour market was modest, and unemployment had not yet fallen substantially. Past recoveries had been associated with a sharp pickup in durables spending, but that had weakened in recent months. The financial incentives offered to purchasers by auto manufacturers were becoming less generous. It was also possible that next year s tax cuts had already been anticipated by consumers and so would generate less additional stimulus when they actually took effect. Mortgage refinancing, which had sustained consumption growth earlier in the year, was now much lower, and (partly as a result) the M measure of the money stock had contracted in the past two months. That too might indicate that the recovery was faltering. Equally, though, the contraction might be related to changes in the relative attractiveness of non-monetary assets, and associated portfolio shifts.##NewPara##Japanese GDP estimates, based on expenditure data, showed the seventh successive quarter of growth, with the third-quarter estimate somewhat stronger than had been expected by the Committee at the time of the November Inflation Report. Investment was estimated to be growing strongly, and net trade had also made a positive contribution to overall growth: exports to other Asian countries continued to grow strongly. But there were doubts about the price deflators used in these estimates, particularly for business investment. The all-activity index of output growth continued to suggest a markedly weaker recovery than that shown by the GDP estimates.##NewPara##Third-quarter growth in non-Japan Asia had rebounded from the weak second-quarter outturn, reinforcing the view that that weakness had reflected the temporary effects of SARS-related disruption. It was encouraging that, in the area as a whole, domestic demand was making a strong contribution to growth.##NewTopic##Money, credit, demand and output##NewPara##The month s news on the UK economy was also mostly positive. GDP was now estimated to have grown by .% in the third quarter, . percentage points faster than the preliminary estimate, with both services and construction growing more strongly than expected   and more than offsetting somewhat weaker production output data.##NewPara##The pattern of expenditure was, however, rather different from that envisaged in the November Inflation Report, with investment falling rather than rising, a strong positive contribution to growth from stockbuilding and the net trade position weaker than expected. As a result, the economy seemed a little less well-balanced. The news on consumption growth tended to reinforce the view that it was not slowing as rapidly as expected. The fall in investment, however, was unexpected. It was possible that the investment data   one of the less reliably measured components of GDP   would be revised.##NewPara##The outlook for the fourth quarter was one of continued strength, with growth if anything likely to be a little stronger than in the third quarter and so at an above-trend rate. Surveys remained generally, but not uniformly, strong, with the CIPS services business activity index at its highest level since  and the manufacturing PMI at its highest since the end of ; and construction was also up strongly. By contrast, aggregate M was now growing at only  % on twelve months ago   compared with over % during the second quarter. That might suggest some slowing in the overall pace of nominal GDP growth in the coming quarters.##NewPara##Retail sales were showing some signs of slower growth, and the Bank s regional Agents reported that some retailers were disappointed with their sales in November. The GfK measure of consumer confidence had fallen a little, largely because consumers were less confident that it was a good time to make a major purchase. But that was perhaps to be expected, given the increase in interest rates and the extensive press commentary on the dangers of excessive household borrowing. The latest CBI Distributive Trades survey showed less buoyancy in retail sales in November, and falls in optimism in all three distribution sectors. The growth of unsecured lending, while still rapid, had also eased   continuing a pattern that had now been evident for some months. This might be a better indicator of the immediate outlook for consumer spending than the growth in secured borrowing, as that was driven largely by house prices and housing market turnover. But the easing in unsecured borrowing growth could simply reflect substitution of secured for unsecured borrowing, a shift which was both cost-effective and was being encouraged by lenders. It was also noted that credit card borrowing growth remained strong.##NewPara##The monthly rates of house price inflation shown by the two main lenders  indices were a little lower. Nonetheless, prices continued to surprise on the upside. The preview of the survey by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) pointed to some moderation in expectations of price increases in the coming months. There had also been fewer new buyer enquiries. In addition, there##NewPara##had been substantial downward revisions to mortgage approvals data, which now showed a much less marked increase over the past few months. It would be a little while before the effects of last month s increase in the repo rate would become evident in the data. All this was consistent with the Committee s previous judgment that both activity and house price inflation would moderate in the coming months.##NewTopic##The labour market, costs and prices##NewPara##Surveys continued to point to a modest tightening in the labour market. Agency staff were in increasing demand, and their availability was falling; private sector employment was reported to be increasing; and the public sector was continuing to recruit. There was some evidence to suggest that underlying earnings growth was picking up, with annual earnings growth in the third quarter . percentage points higher than in the second, once the effects of bonuses were excluded. This was partly accounted for by rapid public sector earnings growth, which was temporarily inflated by the lagged effects of the delayed agreement and implementation of last year s Local Authorities pay settlement. But private sector earnings growth was also picking up, as were pay settlements. It was likely that bonus payments would be higher in the coming months than they had been a year ago, particularly in the financial sector. Employers in some areas were becoming more concerned about possible difficulties in reaching agreement in pay negotiations in the coming pay round, though members noted that such concerns were by no means country-wide and did not necessarily imply that settlements would be higher. The surprise this year had been that there had not so far been more upward pressure on wages, given the increase in National Insurance contribution rates and the higher levels of retail price inflation. The increase in earnings growth over the past few months was consistent with the modest tightening suggested by the surveys, rather than with overheating.##NewPara##RPIX inflation had eased to .% in October, as expected. But the contribution from housing depreciation, which was based on the ODPM index of house prices rather than the lenders  indices, had been a little smaller than expected and implied a somewhat lower profile for RPIX inflation over the next few months than thought likely a month ago. HICP inflation was also likely to be a little lower than previously expected. Nevertheless, there was little in these data that seemed likely to be material to inflation prospects further out.##NewPara##Within the aggregate outturns, annual goods price inflation had increased by some  percentage points over the past year, and services price inflation   at least, of those services produced domestically and in competitive rather than regulated markets   remained high. This pickup in goods price inflation was a feature of price developments in other countries too, earlier in the year, and might have been related to the increased cost of fuels and to the effects of the war in Iraq. But it had not subsequently eased in the United Kingdom, perhaps suggesting growing demand pressures here.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The Committee had been briefed, immediately before their meeting, by Treasury officials on the macroeconomic and fiscal projections to be published in the Chancellor s Pre-Budget Report on##NewPara## December. They noted that the net borrowing requirement was now projected to be higher than in the Budget projections in each of the next five years, and by   billion in the current fiscal year. The Treasury still expected to meet both of its fiscal rules, though with a smaller margin for error. The implications for monetary policy of the information in the Pre-Budget Report would be assessed more fully in the coming months.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The month s news on the world economy, most of which related to the third quarter, matched or exceeded the expectations reflected in the November Inflation Report. The US economy was growing particularly strongly, and the euro area too now showed signs of recovery although overall domestic demand there remained flat. The Asian economies had rebounded from the weakness associated with SARS-related disruption, and growth there seemed in significant part to be generated within the region. It now seemed plausible that the euro-area recovery would materialise earlier than previously thought. But it was by no means certain that it would be more rapid. The continuing weakness of domestic demand in the euro area, together with the risks to the recovery from the possibility of further falls in the US dollar exchange rate, suggested that it was too early to judge its underlying strength.##NewPara##In the United Kingdom too, the news on the month had been positive, but the medium-term outlook remained broadly as envisaged in the November Inflation Report projections. The upside news in the upward revision to third-quarter growth had been accompanied by a rather less balanced composition of demand, with consumption growth remaining strong and business investment##NewPara##apparently falling back. House price inflation continued to exceed expectations, though data revisions and new information suggested rather less buoyancy in housing market activity than previously thought. The labour market was tightening modestly, but with no evidence yet that earnings were growing any more strongly than had been expected. So the medium-term outlook for RPIX inflation remained consistent with the projection on which last month s interest rate decision had been based.##NewPara##Against this background, most members agreed that it was not necessary to change the repo rate this month. First, the news on the month suggested that the downside risks to the outlook were somewhat less than had been thought last month, but it did not have material implications for the central projections. For one member, whose assessment of the medium-term outlook for inflation was somewhat more subdued, the news was not sufficient to discriminate between the alternative views of the balance between potential supply and demand in the economy, and the pace at which underlying inflation was likely to pick up. Second, the full implications of the recent revisions to past National Accounts data were still to be unravelled; and those of the Chancellor s Pre-Budget Report were still to be assessed. Third, a significant factor in the previous month s decision had been the high level of household debt and the consequent uncertainties about the impact of monetary policy. Though the immediate effects of last month s increase in the repo rate had not been unusually large, it was too early to judge whether its eventual effects on the economy   and particularly on households   would match or exceed previous experience; and some of the upside risks in the housing market now appeared to be moderating. Overall, policy needed to remain forward-looking, and to be based   as always   on a fresh assessment each month of the accumulated data, against the projections for output and inflation. If the economy continued to evolve in line with the Committee s central projections, a further increase in the repo rate would be warranted at some point. But the news was not yet sufficient to justify another increase.##NewPara##One member, however, while accepting the thrust of these arguments, put particular weight on the vulnerabilities created by the continued build-up of household debt and felt that an increase in the repo rate this month was justified. While acknowledging that it was too soon to judge the extent of the impact of last month s increase in the repo rate, it could be some time before conclusive evidence on that issue was available to the Committee and next month s decision could in practice be complicated by the probable change in the Committee s target. The news on the month might be small, but it was almost uniformly in an upside direction   both domestically and especially overseas. Inflation expectations had also edged upwards in recent months. Delay in moving the repo rate higher risked##NewPara##allowing interest rates to fall increasingly below their warranted path. Action, by contrast, would be purposeful and at the same time consistent with caution. It would be more likely to ensure a dampening effect on consumption growth and on the further accumulation of debt, and so would help to reduce the future vulnerability of the household sector to adverse economic shocks.##NewPara##The Governor invited members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. Eight members (the Governor, Rachel Lomax, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Marian Bell, Richard Lambert, Stephen Nickell and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. One member (Andrew Large) voted against, preferring to increase the repo rate by  basis points.