The world economy##NewPara##The Committee discussed whether recent news might cause an upward revision to the projections for world activity and prices. In the United States, domestic demand was still strong, but had started to slow. Indeed, it was possible that US growth would be lower than assumed in the August Inflation Report projections. There were signs in the non-farm payroll data of slower employment growth. Final domestic demand had, however, slowed less sharply. There were also some signs of incipient inflationary pressures: some commodity prices had risen, hourly compensation had accelerated and there had been a pick-up in producer prices. The Federal Reserve had recently raised official interest rates by .%.##NewPara##Some of the activity data for the euro area were perhaps a little stronger than had been expected a month ago. They supported the strengthening recovery built into the forecast.##NewPara##In Japan, there was evidence of a sharp fall in corporate investment in the second quarter. Despite this weakness, which was thought likely to be reflected in the forthcoming Q GDP release, other forecasters  projections for Japanese GDP growth in  continued to be revised up. There was also a perception that the authorities would take further fiscal action if needed   as an insurance policy if the recovery faltered. There were signs that deflationary pressures might be easing   the rate of change of the core CPI was essentially flat.##NewPara##The recovery in the rest of Asia had been stronger than had previously been expected, and activity in Brazil and Russia somewhat less weak; though offset to some extent by events in some smaller South American countries. But the environment continued to be fragile, with interest rate spreads remaining at high levels.##NewPara##One question was whether the likely pattern of trade balances in the major industrial countries would give rise to significant exchange rate movements. For example, would the growing US trade deficit lead to a depreciation of the dollar? It was possible that the markets might test the level of the yen against the dollar, with the yen rising and possibly taking the euro with it. Since one of the factors behind the recovery in confidence and activity in the euro area had been the depreciation of the exchange rate, such a move might risk a weaker outlook for the euro area. This in turn would have implications for the United Kingdom, though it would depend in part on what happened to sterling if the dollar depreciated against the yen and the euro. But the link between trade accounts and exchange rates was far from automatic.##NewPara##The Committee noted that other forecasters  projections for world activity had generally continued to be revised up over the past few months, bringing them broadly into line with the Committee s August Inflation Report projections. Although the recent data might not point to a significantly stronger outlook for world activity than assumed in August, there were now signs that gave the Committee greater confidence in its projection of a robust recovery in world activity.##NewTopic##Monetary and financial conditions##NewPara##Broad money growth was now at its lowest since . This was largely accounted for by falls in other financial corporations  (OFC) deposits, rather than changes to money holdings of households or non-financial corporations. The fall in money holdings of other financial corporations was also reflected in a fall in their bank borrowing - both sides of the balance sheet were shrinking. However, the sector was heterogeneous and there seemed to be no single explanation. Although there might be lags, the adjustment did not seem well correlated with a possible reduction in the appetite for risk following the events of last summer and autumn. Another possibility was that the recent falls in deposits were in part a reaction to heavy borrowing through bond markets in advance of the Millennium. In any event, the rapid rise in these deposits and loans in earlier years had been difficult to explain. Overall, the changes to OFC money balances were not well understood and warranted continued investigation. As in the past, the Committee judged that developments in OFC money holdings were likely to have little impact on inflation. As well as focusing on growth in non-OFC money, it was noted that Divisia money continued to grow at around %.##NewPara##Narrow money had been growing at around %, and this seemed somewhat faster than could be explained entirely by earlier reductions in interest rates. The question was whether the##NewPara##signs were of faster growth than thought a month ago. Recent money growth probably presaged faster growth in consumer spending over the next few months, or was at least consistent with the pace of consumer spending growth that had already been seen.##NewPara##Household credit growth had been strong, with short-run growth rates exceeding % on an annual basis. Estimates of mortgage equity withdrawal in Q were the highest since Q , but were considerably below the levels of the late s. House prices had risen sharply again in August, and the annual rate of increase was now nearly % on both the Halifax and Nationwide measures. Although there remained many regional differences, it was no longer correct to describe the rise as being accounted for by a few isolated hot spots. It was difficult to estimate exactly how much the previous reductions in interest rates had fed through to house prices   some rise was to be expected despite the forthcoming abolition of tax relief on mortgage interest payments. For the recent rise in house prices to be accounted for by lower interest rates, people would need to have focused primarily on recent movements in short-term interest rates.##NewPara##It was possible that the transmission mechanism was faster than previously thought, and that the recent rise in house prices simply reflected a more rapid adjustment to a new level following previous reductions in interest rates. But if it were not faster, then it was likely that there was more to come from previous reductions in interest rates, and that other factors had been responsible for the current rapid rate of increase. For example, employment had continued to grow   and with it labour income   and consumer confidence had increased.##NewPara##The current level of the house price to average earnings ratio was only slightly above its long term average. Financial liberalisation probably raised the level of house prices through the s, while the reduction in mortgage interest relief since the mid-s might have somewhat reduced the level of house prices. It was possible that the fall in the average level of nominal interest rates in recent years would, over time, lead to a rise in the house price to average earnings ratio. So it was difficult to know what the equilibrium house price to earnings ratio should be. Of more concern than the current level of house prices was the recent rate of increase. If the current rate of increase continued, the ratio would soon be well above the profile assumed in the August Inflation Report. There was also uncertainty about the size of the effect on domestic demand associated with the current strength of house prices and activity. As measured by indicators such as particulars delivered, activity was now stronger than at any time since the early s. There remained a big stock of, as yet unused, mortgage approvals. Although the current state of the housing market was not like that reached in the late s, the##NewPara##recent indicators meant that the Committee s concern about the possible implications for inflation of housing market developments was rising.##NewPara##Turning to other financial prices, the gilt yield curve was now sharply downward sloping at maturities of five years and beyond. It was likely that the level of long term interest rates partly reflected the effects of the minimum funding requirement. The sterling effective exchange rate index was very close to its level at the time of the August meeting.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##GDP growth had been unchanged from the preliminary estimate in Q, at .%. A breakdown of the expenditure components had now become available. Final domestic demand growth had turned out somewhat stronger than expected in the Inflation Report central projection. This was largely accounted for by stronger consumption growth. Part of this strength might be explained by the change in practice concerning new car registration dates this year, but the strength in consumption seemed more widespread than this. The latest indicators seemed to suggest that strong consumption growth had continued into the third quarter.##NewPara##One possible explanation for stronger consumption was that there had been deeper than expected price discounting, reflecting the previous slowdown in activity after last summer. This might lead to an increase in the level of real consumption, but it did not necessarily imply that strong consumption growth would continue. There was, however, little direct evidence of deeper than expected discounting, although this would be consistent with the weaker than expected outturns for RPIX and the retail sales deflator. However, it was possible that as the economy recovered any such discounting would be reversed. In that case the time profile of profit margins would be a little different from what had been expected in August, so there would be only a temporarily depressing effect on inflation. There was little direct evidence available on the behaviour of profit margins across the economy, so it was particularly difficult to distinguish between these two possibilities.##NewPara##Inventories had made a much larger negative contribution to GDP growth than had been expected a month ago. That seemed consistent with the stronger outturn for consumption, and might indicate an involuntary reduction in stocks. However, the survey data from the CBI and CIPS had shown few signs of a substantial involuntary reduction. If the reduction in inventories had been in response to stronger than expected consumer demand, then the implication might be stronger demand and output growth through the second half of the year than assumed in the##NewPara##central projection of the August Inflation Report. Although there was uncertainty about the appropriate level of the stock-output ratio, it seemed likely that the larger than expected negative contribution in Q reduced the risk of significant destocking in the future.##NewPara##Although consumption had turned out stronger than expected, this had been offset to some extent by weaker investment. Public sector investment was continuing to undershoot spending plans, although this should be made up either later this year or in future years and in any event was a fairly small percentage of total investment. Most of the investment weakness was in private business investment, especially in the manufacturing and distribution sectors. There was a possibility of a Millennium-related slowdown in investment growth and the Bank s regional Agents had found some evidence of a  Millennium pause  in IT -related investment.##NewPara##Net trade had made a slightly stronger contribution to Q growth than had been expected at the time of the August meeting. This reflected weaker than expected imports and somewhat stronger exports. It was difficult to read too much into these figures given their volatility from quarter to quarter.##NewPara##Surveys seemed to be pointing to a slight rise in the quarterly growth rate of GDP in the third quarter, which was consistent with the central projection in the August Inflation Report. But the current annualised rate of growth of final domestic demand of around  % was unsustainable. It was noted, however, that the growth of nominal domestic demand had, slowed in recent quarters. At some point final domestic demand would have to moderate to allow room for an improvement in the external environment feeding through to net trade.##NewTopic##Labour market##NewPara##Employment growth had continued to slow, but unemployment was still falling. The Labour Force Survey measure of unemployment had now reached its lowest rate since the series started, at .%, while the claimant count had fallen to its lowest level since . The FRES survey pointed to increasing shortages of permanent and temporary staff in August. The Bank s regional Agents had also noted tightness returning even in some lower skilled areas.##NewPara##But not all the quantity indicators pointed to greater tightness. It was noted that there had been a reversal in the path of inactivity, which had risen in Q.##NewPara##The latest earnings figures had been difficult to interpret. The Average Earnings Index (AEI) had shown a marked pick up to .% in June compared with .% in May and .% in##NewPara##April, with the three-month headline rate consequently at .% in June. The latest outturn for the AEI meant that earnings growth had turned out somewhat higher than the starting point used in the August inflation projections. That need have little consequence for inflation looking forward, unless the recent outturn affected the view of the future profile for earnings. It was noted that the Committee s best collective judgment of the central projection for earnings growth made at the time of the August Inflation Report was now towards the bottom end of the range of other forecasters.##NewPara##It was difficult to know what was the underlying trend in earnings growth. The higher June figure was influenced by bonuses.  But the change in the ONS form for the reporting of bonuses earlier this year meant that an unaffected year-on-year comparison would not be available until early next year. By contrast with the AEI, the Reward index had shown earnings growth continuing to slow. Settlements also continued to fall gently on the twelve -month employment-weighted measure, to around  % in July. However, after allowing for changes in inflation expectations, real settlements and earnings growth had probably continued to increase.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Turning to prices and costs, some input prices were now moderately stronger, while output and retail prices remained weak. RPIX, for the fourth consecutive month, had been below the target.##NewPara##The Brent oil price had averaged over $ per barrel in August, and was well above $ by the time of the meeting. That compared with an assumption of $ for the price over the next two years, which was the best collective judgment in the August Inflation Report, although some members had opted for a higher assumption of $ in August. The forward price was somewhat below the spot price, but had continued to be well above $. However, the forward price had not typically been a good predictor of the future spot price. If the oil price remained at its current level it would imply higher retail prices than incorporated in the August projections.##NewPara##The Bank s commodity price index had recently been reweighted and this had led to a slight reduction in the level of the index. The reweighted index, like the old, showed an##NewPara##increase in commodity prices over recent months. Commodity prices rose again in July on both the aggregate and non-oil indices.##NewPara##Manufacturing input prices were now rising in annual terms for the first time since , as the downward pressure from sterling s past appreciation and falling world commodity prices had largely worn off. Manufacturing output prices had also been rising gently, but were still falling after stripping out food, beverages, tobacco and petroleum. The rate of increase of the GDP deflator had turned out at historically low levels in Q, at .%. Retail price inflation excluding mortgage interest payments had been constant at .% in July, a little below the rate in the central projection. The headline inflation rate had fallen further to .%, its lowest rate since . These recent low inflation outturns could have some effect on inflation expectations going forward, but it was unclear how much or how long-lasting they would be.##NewPara##There was a risk that commodity prices might turn out higher than assumed a month ago if world demand strengthened and if the rise in the oil price was sustained. In addition, some of the unexpected weakness in retail price inflation over the past few months had been accounted for by seasonal food prices, which were hard to predict. However, the prospect of increasing competition, for example in food retailing, might work to reduce the price level. There were also prospective regulatory effects in the water and electricity industries. Overall, there seemed no strong reasons for changing the general shape of the short-term saucer-shaped projection for inflation made at the time of the August meeting.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##There had been some discussion outside the Bank of whether, in the run-up to the end of the year, concern about YK problems would impose a constraint on monetary policy authorities adjusting interest rates. This debate seemed to be more widespread in the press than in the financial markets, whose main focus remained on the provision of liquidity. The Committee could see no reason why this should constrain UK monetary policy setting, and monetary##NewPara##policy would continue to be set, on the basis of the news from month to month, with a view to achieving the inflation target.##NewPara##The Committee noted that the markets were attaching a low probability to a change in interest rates this month. In that context, the Committee discussed the pros and cons of moving interest rates by less than  basis points. Smaller changes might signal, in appropriate circumstances, the Committee s concern with the outlook for inflation, but with less of an effect on the exchange rate. Continuing the practice of changing interest rates in units of  basis points might make it increasingly difficult ever to change that practice. But a smaller##NewPara##change in interest rates might be seen as excessive fine-tuning. Markets might also expect that a further move in interest rates would follow such a small change.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##In focusing on the data it was difficult to see many indicators, at least on the output side, that were not generally stronger than they appeared a month ago. The question was the extent to which these data affected members  forecasts and how they judged the relationship between output and inflation in the medium term.##NewPara##Some members preferred no change in interest rates this month. In August they had favoured a lower central projection than the best collective judgment shown in the Inflation Report fan chart. On one view, there had been little news since then to alter this judgment. The international situation was developing much as expected, though perhaps a bit weaker in the US and stronger in Japan. UK output growth was recovering, but was still growing below trend, investment was weak and manufacturing output had not even recovered to its level of a year ago. Furthermore, RPIX remained below target and broader price measures such as the deflators for retail prices, for consumption and for GDP were all lower than expectations or recent history. This supported the view that competitive pressures on prices and margins were exerting a stronger downward pressure on inflation, even during conditions of robust domestic demand, than in the past. The recent rise in house prices was unlikely to develop into the type##NewPara##of consumption boom seen in the late s, given the overheated position of the economy then and the stimulus to housing from financial liberalisation and fiscal changes. On this view to raise interest rates now would be premature, and could have adverse effects on the exchange rate and thus damage the recovery in growth that was necessary to return inflation to target.##NewPara##A second view among those favouring no change this month was that the news on the month had probably shifted the central projection up a little towards August s best collective judgment, primarily because of stronger labour market data and the change in tone of the Agents  reports. The risks of higher inflation from the effect of the strong housing market on domestic demand had also increased. But against this there was an argument that sterling might be stronger than assumed in August. The possibility of growth surprises in the UK relative to overseas might now imply some additional upward risk to sterling, even relative to the random walk convention. Business confidence was still fragile. A rate rise would probably be associated with a larger-than-normal appreciation of sterling. It would therefore be preferable to wait to give growth a chance to get established. In recent years, the US had##NewPara##experienced high rates of GDP growth and a significant rate of appreciation in the stock market, without it yet leading to the higher CPI inflation that might have been expected from standard historical relationships. It might therefore be inappropriate to assume that the higher GDP growth and increase in house prices that we were seeing in the UK would necessarily lead to as much of an increase in RPIX inflation as was predicted by historical relationships. The saucer-shaped inflation projection, and the fact that forward -looking indicators of output prices were still benign, allowed time to see how the activity-price relationship was evolving before contemplating any action.##NewPara##A majority of members favoured an increase in interest rates of  basis points this month, although one of them saw some attractions in a smaller increase. Various arguments were identified for a rise.  Since the August meeting, new data showed that the pace of final domestic demand growth in  Q was faster than expected. The current pace of final domestic demand growth could not be sustained indefinitely, and action would be needed to restrain that growth in order to meet the inflation target in the medium term. Consumption growth, together with the fall in inventories, probably indicated faster demand and output growth than previously expected in the second half of the year. The recent strength of the housing market and associated credit data were reasons to believe that consumption growth would remain strong. Growth in narrow money had continued to pick up and the labour market had continued to tighten, with the tone of reports from the Agents on conditions in the labour market reflecting this. Real wages had continued to grow increasingly strongly on most measures. It was recognised that an increase in interest rates now carried some risks. It might damage consumer and business confidence. Given that there was little expectation of an interest rate rise in the markets, there could be a further appreciation of sterling, which would tend to depress further activity in the tradable sectors of the economy. The saucer-shaped projection for inflation provided some time to see how some of the puzzles about the short-run trade-off between nominal and real variables might be resolved. But there was an argument for an early increase in interest rates because there was merit in seeking to adjust expectations now rather than later, when more might otherwise need to be done to have the same effect in slowing domestic demand in order to achieve the inflation target.##NewPara##Of those Committee members favouring an increase, some had taken the view in August that prospective inflation was likely to be somewhat stronger than the profile in the Inflation Report fan chart. The news over the past month   including developments in the oil price, consumer demand, the housing market and the labour market   had together further strengthened the medium-term inflation outlook. In the absence of compelling tactical##NewPara##considerations to the contrary, these members shared the view that a  basis point increase in interest rates was needed now to keep prospective inflation in line with the target.##NewPara##The Governor invited members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be increased by  basis points to .%. Seven members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, David Clementi, Willem Buiter, Charles Goodhart, Ian Plenderleith and John Vickers) voted for the proposition. DeAnne Julius and Sushil Wadhwani voted against, preferring to maintain interest rates at .%.