Financial markets##NewPara##Price movements in financial markets had been small over the past month, suggesting that market participants had not found the news about economic prospects and official interest rates particularly surprising. Short-term market interest rates had risen somewhat in US dollar, euro and sterling markets, apparently influenced by Chairman Greenspan s Congressional testimony, but had fallen back after the release of the preliminary data for US GDP growth in the second quarter, leaving US dollar and sterling rates up only slightly on the month. The forward sterling interest rates implied by the market yield curve pointed to a strong expectation that the Committee would raise the repo rate this month. So did the Reuters survey of economists:  out of  respondents expected a  basis point increase, attaching a mean probability of % to a rise of that size. Longer-term market interest rates and, judging by the prices in the markets for index-linked bonds, inflation rates expected over the next ten years were little changed at home or abroad.##NewPara##Exchange rate movements over the month had been small. The sterling effective rate had appreciated by around .%, broadly consistent with the movements in market interest rates.##NewPara##The sterling effective rate was now some two percentage points above the level at the time of the May##NewPara##Most major equity market price indices had dropped a little over the month, although the FTSE-All Share index was up slightly. Indices with heavy representation of information technology##NewPara##stocks had tended to fall the most. All the main market indices were a few per cent below their levels##NewPara##at the time of the May Inflation Report; only some of these falls could be explained by the movements in interest rates over the period.##NewTopic##The international economy##NewPara##The news over the past month had left the broad picture of a robust and broadly based global recovery largely intact, although the US economy had been a little weaker than expected.##NewPara##In the euro area, the latest data had been consistent with overall growth near its trend rate.##NewPara##The estimate of .% GDP growth in the first quarter had not been revised, although revisions to estimates of expenditure components suggested that final domestic demand had been stronger last year than previously thought. Indicators of output pointed to growth at a similar pace in the second quarter and the beginning of the third. Industrial production had increased in May for the fourth successive month and the Purchasing Managers Index (PMI) for manufacturing had risen slightly in July, although the PMI for services had remained unchanged. The evidence about consumers  demand was more mixed. Euro-area consumer confidence was unchanged in July, remaining below its long-run average, but retail sales had increased strongly in June, after a weak figure for May. Inflation on the HICP measure remained above the levels implied by the ECB s definition of price stability.##NewPara##The pattern of recovery in Germany was still different from that in the euro area as a whole. Whereas final domestic demand growth had picked up in the rest of the euro area, the German recovery had relied more heavily on the growth of exports. Past experience suggested that export growth would eventually stimulate the growth of German domestic demand, but this did not appear to have happened yet. German domestic demand growth might be being held back by uncertainty about the timing, extent and consequences of various proposed structural reforms and about their possible implications for unemployment and the future tax burden.##NewPara##For the United States, the main news was the weaker-than-expected estimate for second-quarter growth, of .%. Consumption growth had eased markedly, primarily because of a slowing in spending on non-durable goods, although car sales had been particularly weak in June. It seemed likely that consumption growth would pick up in Q; the main measures of consumer confidence had risen in the summer. Although the June non-farm payrolls figure had been weak, these data were prone to revision; unemployment claims had remained at a low level, which might help to support##NewPara##consumer confidence. Indicators of output also suggested that growth would be robust in Q; both the manufacturing and non-manufacturing ISM indices had risen in July, the latter sharply, and the weakness of industrial production in June had probably been due to a temporary weather-related fall in the output of the utilities sector. The headline annual measure of CPI inflation had ticked up in June, and so had the annual core CPI inflation measure that excludes (volatile) energy costs, suggesting that underlying inflationary pressures had risen during the second quarter.##NewPara##In Asia, the data suggested that the Japanese recovery was continuing. Industrial production in June had been around % higher than a year earlier. Nominal GDP growth had now been increasing for four consecutive quarters and the consumer price index was unchanged over the year to June.##NewPara##The Chinese economy might have slowed a little in Q, but there had been no sign of a  hard landing  so far.##NewPara##The most striking development in the past month had been the sharp rise in the price of oil: up over % in sterling terms. The Economist non-oil commodities index, in contrast, had fallen.##NewPara##The oil price rise reflected a range of factors, including the continuing concerns about the security of Middle East supplies, renewed worries about terrorism in the United States and uncertainty about Russian supplies in the light of the threat of bankruptcy to Yukos, a major producer. OPEC had increased production in June, but the margin of spare capacity in the short run was now very low.##NewPara##Unlike in some other recent episodes of oil price rises, longer-term futures prices had also moved upwards significantly. The risk of a much more pronounced rise in oil prices, with possibly adverse consequences for world demand, had probably increased. If oil prices remained at their current levels, the direct consequences for activity, income and retail prices in the United Kingdom would probably not be great, given relatively low UK reliance on oil imports, the prevalence of less oil-intensive production methods than two decades ago and the large tax wedge between crude oil prices and retail petrol prices.##NewTopic##Money, credit, demand and output##NewPara##The ONS preliminary estimate of .% for GDP growth in the second quarter was broadly in line with what the Committee had expected, as were the relative contributions of services and the production industries, which had expanded at similar rates. BCC and CBI surveys had shown a sharp increase in capacity utilisation in the quarter.##NewPara##There were, however, some signs of a possible easing in the pace of growth. The twelve-month growth rates of broad money (M) and M lending had fallen a little in June (the latest month for which data were available), and that of narrow money in July. According to the CBI quarterly Industrial Trends Survey, business optimism had been lower in July than in April, although it remained above its historical average. The CIPS indices of business activity and incoming new business for the services sector had eased during Q and had been lower in July than in the preceding three months, while the Bank s regional Agents had reported that, according to their contacts, the growth of consumer services might have slowed. However, the Bank s Agents also reported that the growth of manufacturing output had become more broadly based, and the CIPS Purchasing Managers Index for manufacturing in July had reached its highest level since  (though other surveys of manufacturing gave more mixed signals). Given the greater weight of services in total output, these indicators were consistent with a slight slowdown in overall growth in July. But they also suggested that there had been some rebalancing of growth; that might   as suggested by the Agents  contacts   reflect some improvement in export prospects for manufacturers as a consequence of the global economic recovery.##NewPara##On the demand side, there had been mixed signals about the strength of consumption. In the light of the service sector output data and surveys of consumer services as well as retail sales, the Committee continued to be of the view that there had been more momentum in consumption in Q than currently reflected in the official data. Retail sales growth had been rapid in June, giving a growth rate for the second quarter of .%, very similar to that in Q. As the Q data demonstrated, retail sales were not always a good guide to what the ONS measure of overall consumption would be; one reason was that the growth of items of consumption no t included in retail sales, such as tourism and car sales, could be very different. Indicators suggested that new car sales had slowed significantly in the second quarter. In July, consumer confidence had picked up slightly, partly reflecting an increase in the balance of respondents planning to make major purchases over the next twelve months. But the CBI Distributive Trades survey and reports from the Bank s Agents indicated that the annual growth of retail sales might have slowed in July; some respondents had suggested that retailers might have brought forward summer sales to June in response to a perceived weakening in the growth of consumer demand.##NewPara##There were now more signs that the pace of house price increases was beginning to slacken.##NewPara##The three-month-on-three-month rate of increase of the average of the Halifax and Nationwide indices had fallen in July for the second consecutive month. The June RICS survey showed a second##NewPara##consecutive fall in the net balance of estate agents reporting price increases and a fall in the ratio of house sales to stocks on estate agents  books: a range of other indicators of housing market activity, such as those of mortgage approvals and net reservations, had also declined. Agents  contacts confirmed this picture. A deceleration in house prices would tend to slow the growth of consumption, but it was unclear how rapidly and by how much house price inflation would moderate. Also, it was uncertain how large the impact would be of any given change in house prices on consumption. That depended on factors such as the proportion of households who were credit constrained and the extent of demand for housing as an investment asset.##NewPara##One additional complicating factor was the recent rapid growth of the buy-to-let market, raising the demand for housing as an investment asset. According to an informal survey by the Bank s Agents, the growth of this market was now slowing, but there was little evidence of selling in anticipation of lower future capital gains. Nevertheless, compared with owner-occupiers, buy-to-let owners  demand for property might be more sensitive to changes in prospective returns on different assets, for example because their transactions costs were likely to be lower, as these would not include the costs of moving house. So, to the extent that house prices were currently out of equilibrium, sales by buy-to-let owners could help to precipitate a more abrupt adjustment.##NewPara##After two strong quarters of business investment in  Q and  Q, investment intentions remained at or above their historical averages. However, high capital gearing might make some companies cautious about taking on more debt.##NewPara##The latest plans for nominal government spending, as published in HM Treasury s  Spending Review in July, projected continued rapid growth into , after which it would moderate. The impact of government spending on the outlook for inflation was best captured by its effect on the demand for resources in the economy; this too was likely to grow rapidly.##NewTopic##Wages, costs and prices##NewPara##The data from the labour market over the past month had been mixed, but were broadly consistent with a continuing gradual tightening. Surprisingly, the employment rate had fallen##NewPara##. percentage points in the three months to May compared with the three months to February;##NewPara##the counterpart had largely been a rise in inactivity rather than in unemployment. But other indicators##NewPara##of the demand for labour had held up: average hours had stayed steady and the unemployment rate had remained unchanged. Employment surveys continued to point to moderate growth in the demand for labour. The Agents  contacts reported that labour markets were tightening slowly and the REC survey had found that the availability of staff had decreased further in June. So it seemed likely that the unexpected fall in the employment rate had reflected short-term volatility or sampling error.##NewPara##Whole-economy and private sector settlements had continued to drift up; so had whole economy annual regular pay growth. The Agents  contacts also reported some continuing upward pressure on pay, mentioning among other factors the pressure to restore differentials in response to earlier increases in the minimum wage; pay drift was thought to be increasing, and that might be an indication of higher future pay settlements. But regular pay growth in the private sector had remained steady, and, indeed, fallen a little on the three-month-on-three-month measure. The growth in regular pay per hour in the economy as a whole had also remained flat.##NewPara##CPI inflation had picked up to .% in June, half a percentage point above its level three months earlier. The main factors had been the recent rise in petrol prices and the  base effect  from falls in petrol prices a year earlier. In the short run, CPI inflation was likely to fall back during the rest of this year partly because that  base effect  disappeared and the proposed increase in the tax on petrol had been deferred. In addition, the prices of foodstuffs and mi scellaneous services had risen less rapidly than expected at the time of the May Inflation Report, which also contributed to a lower short-run projection of the rate of CPI inflation. In line with pre-release arrangements, an advance estimate of CPI inflation in July had been provided to the Governor   working days ahead of publication, and this suggested a fall in the rate to .%. However, there was evidence of mounting inflationary pressure along the supply pipeline, with the rates of increase of input, output and import prices rising and a number of surveys pointing to higher output price inflation.##NewPara##The Committee noted that CPI inflation had been subdued over the past few years. One reason might have been that pricing margins had narrowed more than expected, perhaps as a result of a greater degree of competition. The terms of trade had also moved further in the United Kingdom s favour than expected. But it was not clear whether these changes would persist or go further, or whether they would to some degree turn out to be a cyclical phenomenon that might reverse.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections published in the##NewPara##The Committee s central projection, based on the assumption that official interest rates follow a path implied by the market yield curve, was for four-quarter GDP growth to remain above its long-run average in the near term, but then to slow during the second year of the projection as final domestic demand growth moderated. This profile was broadly similar to the one published in the May Inflation Report. The Committee s central projection for CPI inflation, also on the assumption that official interest rates follow a path implied by the market yield curve, was for an initial slowdown, after which it would pick up steadily to meet the target around the two-year point. Thereafter, CPI inflation was projected to stabilise close to the % target. Temporary weakness in some components of the CPI, and some reduction in the current strong contribution from petrol prices, were responsible for the near-term slowdown. Subsequently, the impact of domestic demand pressures would become more apparent, and the effect in the first year of the forecast of the weakness of import prices would die away.  For the first two years, this projection was broadly similar to that published in May.##NewPara##The Committee also examined projections for GDP growth and CPI inflation based on the assumptions that the official interest rate remained constant at either .% or .%.##NewPara##These projections showed slightly more rapid demand growth, particularly in the former case, and lower exchange rate paths; hence they also suggested a slightly higher profile for CPI inflation.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the various risks   in both directions   around these central projections. There were a number of major downside risks to inflation. A more abrupt house price correction was possible, associated with a sharper-than-expected slowdown in the growth of consumption. There might be a slower-than-expected pickup in inflation if wage bargainers and price setters formed their price expectations by extrapolating recent low inflation rates. The narrowing of pricing margins might continue.  External demand growth might slacken, in particular if oil prices were to rise even more sharply. And faster-than-expected productivity growth, perhaps as a result of the late  s boom in information, communications and technology investment, might raise the rate of growth of potential supply. But there were major upside risks to inflation as well. In particular, the narrowing of goods producers  margins might reflect cyclical factors and therefore start to reverse.##NewPara##And, given the degree of labour market tightness, wage inflation might rise more rapidly than expected.##NewPara##Overall, the Committee s best collective judgment was that the risks to the central projections for both GDP growth and CPI inflation were broadly balanced. There was a range of views among members, about both the central projections and the risks around them, but the differences were small.##NewPara##Neither the news on the month, nor since the May Inflation Report, had significantly changed the picture of a broadly based world recovery and UK GDP growth above trend. Fiscal and monetary policies in most countries were still stimulatory. The US economy had perhaps been a little weaker than expected, but the recovery in the euro area now seemed more robust and the major Asian economies continued to expand strongly. In the United Kingdom, consumption growth seemed a little weaker than expected, but demand as a whole was likely to grow faster than the supply capacity of the economy.  There was considerable uncertainty about the degree of slack in the labour market and about the level of capacity utilisation, but it seemed likely that the level of demand for resources was now high relative to potential supply. The increases in the repo rate since November were likely to have started to moderate activity, but it was too soon to assess the size of the pass-through to CPI inflation. The Committee noted that it would be necessary to monitor closely how this uncertainty and the other major risks, in both directions, evolved.##NewPara##The Committee considered the case for raising the repo rate by  basis points. First and foremost, the Committee s forecasts, whether based on the market yield curve or the constant interest rate assumption, suggested that an increase would be consistent with bringing CPI inflation back to its % target over the next couple of years. Second, although an argument could be made for bringing CPI inflation back towards target more rapidly if it could then be stabilised at that level, in practice, that degree of fine tuning, entailing more volatile demand growth, was neither feasible nor desirable. Third, for some members, the consequences of the upside risks to the inflation outlook materialising outweighed those of the downside risks because of their impact on future inflation expectations. Fourth, for one member, the continuing rapid growth of household debt, well in excess of the growth of disposable income, was increasing the vulnerability of consumption to the crystallisation of any of the downside risks to activity; a rise in the repo rate now would help to reduce the difficulties that could pose for monetary policy in the future.##NewPara##The Committee also reviewed some possible arguments against an increase, although they did not find them persuasive. First, although the projections implied that a rise in rates might be appropriate at some point, that did not necessarily mean this month. Inflation expectations among wage bargainers and price setters generally appeared to be well-anchored, so a short delay, during which the risks to the outlook could be re-evaluated in the light of new information, might not be costly. Second, the projections for CPI inflation, under both the market and constant rate assump tions, showed it undershooting the target for a considerable period.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be increased by  basis points to .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.