Financial markets##NewPara##Short-term interest rates had risen during the past month in the major industrial economies, but by more in the United Kingdom than in the United States or the euro area. The release of the minutes of the Committee s October meeting had led to widespread market expectations of an increase in the Bank s repo rate. By contrast, market participants did not expect the Federal Open Markets Committee to raise US interest rates until well into .##NewPara##Despite the rise in short rates, forward rates in the United Kingdom had fallen at long maturities. This might have reflected short-term positioning by market participants, taking views on the future shape of the yield curve, against the background of continuing demand for longer gilts to hedge the liabilities of life assurance companies and pension funds. A small short-term movement in long forward rates was of no particular significance for monetary policy. But the broad stability of long- term rates was encouraging evidence for the continuing credibility of monetary policy.##NewPara##The effective exchange rate index for sterling had risen by over % since the Committee s October meeting. This movement was broadly consistent with changes in short-term interest differentials over the same period. Given that the recent rise in sterling reflected expectations of a rise in the Bank s repo rate, a repo rate increase should not result in further appreciation.##NewPara##Equity markets had moved little in the past month, which implied that the upward influence from economic news and the downward influence from higher interest rates had been broadly offsetting. The major equity indices for the United States, the United Kingdom and the euro area had risen significantly from the levels embodied in the August Inflation Report.##NewTopic##The world economy##NewPara##The continuing weakness evident in data releases from the euro area suggested that near-term prospects for external demand for UK goods and services were slightly weaker than at the time of the August Inflation Report, even though news from other areas had been positive, particularly in the latest month. The changes in the Committee s projections for the world economy since August had only a modest negative impact on the projections for UK inflation.##NewPara##GDP had increased by .% in the United States in the third quarter, which was the fastest rate for nearly twenty years. Consumption and investment had both grown robustly. Net trade had also made a positive contribution, but the weakness of imports looked anomalous, even though US competitiveness would have been helped by the depreciation of the dollar over the previous year. The composition of growth supported the view that the recovery would be durable. The performance of investment was particularly important in this respect: the pickup in Q had been broadly based, with investment rising in both the information, communications and technology (ICT) and producer durables (excluding ICT) sectors. The Institute for Supply Management s manufacturing index had reached its highest level since January , and industrial production had risen by .% in September. The financial environment for investment was supportive:  third-quarter corporate earnings had been stronger than expected, and equity values had risen, so that a large increase in borrowing from banks had not been necessary. There were some signs that large corporations were recovering their confidence to undertake merger and acquisition activity. By contrast, some of the strength of US consumption might prove to be temporary. Consumption had probably been stimulated in the short term by tax rebates paid in July and August, and the profile of retail sales suggested that the pace had eased towards the end of the quarter. Moreover, the rise in longer-term interest rates since May meant that less support could be expected from mortgage refinancing. And household gearing was high, so that consumers might be vulnerable to adverse shocks. However, other factors should be supportive for consumption. The elements of the tax package due to take effect in  were much larger than those which had already been implemented, although consumers might already have anticipated them to some extent. Household confidence might be bolstered by signs of improvement in the labour market, although this would probably require further evidence of an upturn in employment prospects. And monetary policy remained highly accommodative.##NewPara##In the euro area, new data in the latest month had been limited. There remained a disjunction between disappointing economic data and more encouraging business surveys. Euro-area industrial##NewPara##production had fallen in August; if it were to remain at that level in September, the rise in the third quarter as a whole would be insufficient to offset the fall in Q. But business survey data pointed to a resumption in growth: the Purchasing Managers  Indices (PMIs) for manufacturing and services had both increased in October; the European Commission measure of euro-area industrial confidence had also increased slightly, reflecting improved orders and recent production; and the German IFO index had increased for the sixth consecutive month in October. Stronger surveys did not invariably precede improved economic performance, and the relationship between the IFO index and German output had recently been less close. But taken together, the business surveys suggested an upside risk to euro-area output in the near term relative to the Committee s projections. The latest euro-area consumer confidence survey showed no change and remained below its long-run average.##NewPara##Economic prospects for the euro area over the next two years were uncertain. There were some positive factors. Real interest rates were low, though to a lesser extent than in the United States. Domestic demand in the euro area had been over % higher in  Q than a year earlier. Household debt was less burdensome in several euro-area countries than in the United States or the United Kingdom, which could facilitate stronger future consumption growth. The firmer economic prospects in the rest of the world would support external demand. But there were also some possible adverse influences. Corporate gearing levels might further restrain investment growth. The rise in the euro over the past year would probably weaken the contribution to be expected from net trade. The largest three economies   Germany, France and Italy   were all relatively weak at present, and the weakness of Germany might be particularly important for its trading partners. And from a longer-term perspective, it was possible that the Committee s expectations for the sustainable rate of output growth in the euro area were too high. With low population growth, output and demand growth might average only % per annum, or possibly less, if productivity growth in recent years represented the underlying trend.##NewPara##There had been little economic news from Japan in the latest month. It remained difficult to reconcile the strong expenditure-based and weaker output-based measures of growth. Industrial production was reported to have increased by % in September, but this was a volatile series. Output growth had increased across most of non-Japan Asia; in China, the annual rate of GDP growth was close to %. It now appeared that the impact of SARS on the region had been temporary, mainly affecting  Q. Exports from the region were picking up. But the performance of some of the newly industrialised Asian countries, notably Korea, was weaker.##NewTopic##Money, credit, demand and output##NewPara##The monetary aggregates, on the deposit side, were supportive of demand growth without suggesting that a further increase was in prospect. Aggregate M deposit growth had been fairly steady in , at an annual rate of % to %. Household M growth was also steady, at an annual rate of around %; the growth of households  Divisia, a monetary aggregate which gave greater weight to deposits that were more likely to be used for making transactions, was a little lower than at the beginning of ; and the annual growth rate of notes and coins in circulation had declined in October.##NewPara##The credit aggregates suggested greater strength. The annual growth rate of aggregate M lending to the non-bank private sector had been over % for several months. Total lending, secured and unsecured, to individuals had increased by % in the twelve months to September, and this rate had picked up during the year.##NewPara##Several indicators suggested that the housing market had strengthened in recent months. On activity, net reservations of new houses and loan approvals had both increased, suggesting that completed transactions were likely to pick up. The average time taken to sell a property had fallen over the past two mo nths. On house price inflation, an average of the Halifax and Nationwide indices in the three months to October showed a rise of .%, and, according to the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, the balance of estate agents reporting price increases in the previous three months had risen sharply in September. This generally buoyant picture was supported by evidence from the Bank s regional Agents.##NewPara##It remained difficult to explain the continuing rise in the ratio of house prices to earnings, and hence to assess prospects for the housing market. The Committee had previously considered three hypotheses: that the equilibrium ratio had increased further in the past year, reflecting in part the balance of demand and supply; that the recent rise in prices might have been driven by speculative behaviour or over-optimistic views about the sustainable level of house prices, in which case a correction would be expected at some stage; and that the lenders  house price indices might be exaggerating the underlying rate of increase. As before, it remained extremely difficult to distinguish between these hypotheses.##NewPara##Most of the news on UK output and demand during the past month had been positive. GDP in Q was estimated to have grown by .% over the previous quarter, in line with the Committee s expectations, although the weak industrial production data for September might imply a small downward revision. Recent business surveys had all strengthened. For example, the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) services activity balance had risen in October to its highest level since November . The CBI and BCC measures of manufacturing confidence also suggested a pickup, while the CIPS manufacturing output index had reached its highest level for seven years. And the CIPS report on construction was consistent with robust growth in the second half of the year. Overall, the evidence from the various surveys of business activity suggested that quarterly GDP growth could exceed its trend rate in  Q.##NewPara##On the expenditure side, the revisions to the National Accounts data released at the end of September had suggested that demand was better balanced than previously thought. The level of business investment was estimated to have been higher, and the outlook was more encouraging. The most recent indicators suggested that consumer spending had not decelerated by as much as the Committee had previously expected. Retail sales had grown by .% in the third quarter, and the quarterly growth rate had averaged .% since the first half of . The CBI Distributive Trades survey for October had pointed to continuing buoyancy into  Q. However, the persistent strength of house price inflation seemed to be having less upward impact on consumption than would have been expected on the basis of historical experience.##NewTopic##The labour market, costs and prices##NewPara##Surveys suggested that private sector demand for labour had strengthened. CIPS employment surveys suggested a rise in private sector employment, with the construction sector particularly robust. Demand for agency staff had increased further in October. Reports from the Bank s regional Agents suggested tighter labour conditions in services and an increase in skills shortages. Unemployment remained flat.##NewPara##Pay pressures were little changed. Whole-economy average earnings rose by .% in the three months to August, remaining within the % to  % range that had prevailed so far this year. Pay settlements had increased slightly in September, but survey evidence pointed to little upward pressure on settlements in the forthcoming year. By contrast, the Bank s Agents reported suggestions that pay negotiations could be more difficult in  than in the recent past. This might reflect the fact that real##NewPara##post-tax labour incomes had been falling in recent months, for the first time since .##NewPara##RPIX inflation had been .% in the year to September. The recent unexpected strength of house prices meant that the fall in RPIX inflation envisaged over the next few months, reflecting the falling contribution of the housing depreciation component, might not be as marked as the Committee had thought. There had recently been a broadly based rise in global non-oil commodity prices, which were up by nearly % in dollar terms since their low point in . But although this implied a significant rise in sterling UK input prices, it would not have much direct impact on the projection for RPIX inflation. However, the Committee noted that if the recent rise in commodity prices reflected stronger global demand, that could eventually put upward pressure on the world price of finished goods, which in turn would have a more material effect on UK inflation. By contrast, oil prices had fallen by around % in dollar terms since the Committee s October meeting.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##A rise in the official repo rate was widely expected. Out of  economists polled by Reuters in the week before the meeting,  expected a  basis point increase. A few commentators had suggested that a rise of  basis points was possible. And the short-term yield curve was as steep as at any time since the Committee s inception in ; short sterling contracts implied an expectation that the official repo rate would exceed % in early .##NewTopic##The November GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections to be published in the##NewPara##The Committee s central projections continued to imply a benign outlook for the economy. On the assumption of an official repo rate of .%, the profile for GDP growth was rather stronger than in the August Inflation Report, and quarterly GDP was expected to grow marginally above trend through the forecast period. The profile for annual RPIX inflation was somewhat higher than in the August Report, and was projected to edge down in the near term, reflecting the diminishing impact of housing costs, and then to remain around the target during the rest of the forecast period. Imported and domestic cost pressures were projected to build gradually into the medium term.##NewPara##The Committee noted various risks surrounding these projections. There were uncertainties relating to the outlook for the world economy; to the outlook for UK household spending, including the sustainable level of house prices and consumers  own perceptions of the likely rate of increase of real incomes; and to short-term prospects for earnings. One key judgment related to the interpretation of the recent revisions to GDP. The estimated level of output for several years past had been revised upwards, but there had been no revision to RPIX inflation. The judgment embodied in the central projection was that the level of output and employment consistent with stable inflation had been higher than previously thought. But it was possible that the faster growth in the past was indicative of a more rapid rate of underlying productivity growth, which would continue into the future; that might imply lower future inflationary pressure than in the central projection. An alternative possibility was that the factors bearing down on inflation in the past, for example the appreciation of sterling, had been more powerful than previously thought, and that, as these effects disappeared over the forecast period, inflationary pressures would be hi gher than in the central projection.##NewPara##The Committee judged that, relative to the central projection, the overall risks to growth were slightly on the downside and those to inflation were broadly balanced.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The balance of news in the latest month had been positive for UK output and inflation. The US economy had grown strongly in Q, and the recovery there looked more firmly established, although above-trend growth could persist for some time before output reached full capacity. The outlook for the euro area was still uncertain. In the United Kingdom, the latest data for retail sales, household borrowing and the housing market were all strong, and investment intentions surveys pointed to a pickup. Equity prices at home and abroad had risen since the August Inflation Report, although not materially on the month. The recent rise in sterling would tend to bear down on inflation, but that was probably associated, to some extent, with market expectations that the official repo rate would be raised at this meeting, rather than being an independent factor.##NewPara##The Committee also noted that, because of higher household debt burdens, there was increased uncertainty as to the strength of the response of consumption to any given interest rate change. It would therefore be appropriate to move interest rates cautiously. Nevertheless, it was important that policy should remain forward-looking, so the present decision should be based on the Committee s assessment of the prospects for inflation and the associated risks.##NewPara##Most members thought that a modest rise in the repo rate was now appropriate. This view was supported by a number of arguments, to which different members gave different weights. The forecast suggested that inflation would be above the target and rising at the forecast horizon. This was for several reasons. First, there was now stronger evidence of recovery in the world economy. The upturn in US investment was particularly significant, since there had previously been uncertainty as to whether this would occur before US consumption slowed. Second, the growth in UK domestic demand now appeared to have been more broadly based and better balanced in the past few years than the Committee had previously thought, following the September revisions to the National Accounts. Third, consumption growth and housing activity were not slowing as much as the Committee had expected, and investment and government expenditure were likely to continue to strengthen. Survey evidence suggested a pickup in output in services and manufacturing, and the labour market appeared to be tightening a little. Finally, even after a modest repo rate increase, monetary policy would still be accommodative.##NewPara##Moreover, a consideration of the risks to the outlook suggested that a rise in the repo rate was appropriate. First, the change to the global outlook had reduced the downside risks to activity, and, to the extent that the July repo rate reduction had been a precaution against the crystallisation of such risks, that reduction should now be reversed. Second, if rates were not raised, household borrowing would be more likely to continue to grow at a rate that would eventually prove unsustainable, and there would be a greater risk of a sharp downward adjustment to house prices if they became more overvalued, complicating the operation of monetary policy.##NewPara##The Committee reviewed the arguments for leaving interest rates unchanged, to which, again, different members attached different weights. First, once housing depreciation was excluded, the current rate of inflation was low and wage pressures were muted. Second, the recent weakness of manufacturing output suggested that there were downside risks to output as a whole in the near term and hence to inflation. Third, there remained many uncertainties about the interpretation of the data which had yet to be resolved. For most members, however, these arguments were not sufficient to outweigh the arguments for a repo rate rise.##NewPara##For one member, the Committee s central projection for inflation was somewhat too high. First, following the revisions to the National Accounts, the balance of potential supply relative to demand might be more favourable than in the Committee s central projection. The stronger demand which had##NewPara##materialised over the past four years might have been directly associated with a stronger supply performance and therefore implied rather less inflationary pressure than in the central projection. Second, the projections for growth in the euro area might be too optimistic. There had been few signs of recovery in reported data; most of the surveys, although higher than in earlier months, were below their long-term average and so did not suggest that trend growth would be achieved soon; and the fragility of corporate balance sheets might restrain investment. The most likely outcome was therefore for a more delayed recovery than in the Committee s central projection. Taken together, these points could imply a materially lower projection for RPIX inflation at the two-year horizon. Inflation was likely to be rising at that point, so, on this forecast, a rise in repo rate some time in  was likely to be warranted to continue meeting the target. But to increase it now was not necessary and would involve some cost in output.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be raised by  basis points to .%. Eight members (the Governor, Rachel Lomax, Andrew Large, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Richard Lambert, Stephen Nickell and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. One member (Marian Bell) voted against, preferring to maintain the repo rate at .%.