The world economy##NewPara##Recent news about the world economy suggested a strengthening recovery in the United States; there were also some more positive indications of recovery in Japan. Activity in the euro area, however, appeared to be stagnant and continued to fall short of expectations. Exchange rate movements broadly reflected this divergent news on growth prospects, with both the US dollar and the yen appreciating in effective rate terms while the euro had depreciated. Equity prices were up in all major markets, but particularly in Japan.##NewPara##In the United States, estimated growth in the second quarter had been revised up to .%, with upward revisions to growth of consumption, government spending and private sector investment and a smaller drag on growth from net trade. The early indications were that the pick-up in growth in the first half of the year had continued into the third quarter. Retail sales values increased by .% in July, suggesting that consumption growth remained robust; new orders of non- defence capital goods continued to pick up modestly, consistent with a steady revival in investment; and the indicators of output were also encouraging, with industrial production up in July and the ISM manufacturing PMI up strongly in August. The ISM indicator for non-manufacturing business activity was not yet available for August, but it had improved sharply in June and July. All these indicators were above market expectations   though broadly consistent with the recovery embodied in the August Inflation Report   and pointed to a strong recovery in activity in the second half of the year.##NewPara##It was noteworthy that short and medium-term US bond yields had continued to rise. A month ago, it had been suggested that part of the increase in yields during July was a temporary consequence##NewPara##of the re-hedging of mortgage-backed security portfolios, and so would unwind. That it had not done so suggested a continuing market reappraisal of US growth prospects, and so of the likely path of official interest rates. The extent of the upward shift was, nonetheless, remarkable. It was possible that markets had previously overreacted to earlier official comments about the risks of deflation, driving yields to artificially low levels, and now believed that recovery was firmly established. The spread between yields on ten-year nominal and index-linked government bonds had also increased, which might imply an increase in inflation expectations. But it had only returned to levels seen earlier in the year.##NewPara##The key question now was about the durability of the US recovery. Among the positive factors were that consumption growth remained resilient, despite the weak labour market; that non-residential investment was stronger, backed up by an improvement in corporate profits; and that both fiscal and monetary policy continued to provide a strong stimulus. But some caution was warranted. The recent strength of consumption might in part be the result of tax cuts and rebates, which would boost the level of consumption but have only a temporary effect on its growth rate. Furthermore, part of the increase in retail sales in July was accounted for by car purchases, in response to a fresh round of incentives; it might therefore reflect simply a shift in the timing of these purchases. There was now less scope for profitable refinancing of mortgages, and consumer confidence was still somewhat subdued   probably reflecting job market uncertainties. The medium-term outlook for investment was also unclear: the recent recovery might reflect delayed replacement investment, rather than investment in new capacity, and the large fiscal deficit might eventually put upward pressure on the cost of capital (though the evidence on the strength of such  crowding out  effects was ambiguous).##NewPara##In Japan, the recent news was also encouraging. GDP was currently estimated to have grown by .% in the second quarter, among the fastest of the G countries and well above expectations. But it seemed possible that this might be an over-estimate, as it was based on expenditure data and, in nominal terms, there had been growth of only .%: the expenditure deflator had decreased faster than other price indices and its fall might be overstated. Output-based indicators were also consistent with more modest growth. But equity prices had risen by more than % over the month, and orders data had been stronger, so the improvement should not be wholly discounted. Even if the equity gains did not themselves support demand, they would at least help to ease the pressures on banks  balance##NewPara##Elsewhere in Asia, the easing in growth was in line with expectations and seemed likely to be temporary, recovering in part as the effects of the SARS epidemic unwound. Growth in China remained robust in the second quarter, and indeed might be seen as evidence that activity in the region was becoming less dependent on the external stimulus traditionally provided by the US economy: for example, China was increasing in importance as a destination for exports from other countries in the region.##NewPara##In marked contrast to this positive news from the United States and Asia, activity in the euro area continued to fall short of expectations. The flash estimate pointed to no growth in GDP in the second quarter. Moreover, this estimate did not incorporate the latest data for France, where GDP was estimated to have been .% lower in the second quarter than in the first. This fall   like that in  Germany   reflected a weaker net trade position. Activity in some of the smaller euro-area countries that were important UK export markets had also been weak in the second quarter. Industrial production in the euro area was .% lower in the second quarter as a whole, and the sharp fall in May had been followed by a further fall in June. There were, nonetheless, some possible grounds for optimism about near-term prospects: the continued rise in equity prices should support domestic demand; business confidence had improved, the manufacturing PMI had increased in August   the second successive improvement   and the services PMI was above  and at its highest level since July ; and fewer banks were reporting tighter credit conditions.  In addition, the German IFO index had registered its fourth successive monthly increase (though the improvement was largely in the expectations component and this index had given false encouragement in the past). The full effects of the  basis point interest rate reduction in June were still to feed through, and the recent partial reversal of the appreciation in the euro effective exchange rate would also help, through its impact on net trade. Overall, however, prospects for the euro area still seemed to depend on the US recovery rather than on domestic sources of growth.##NewTopic##Financial markets, money and credit##NewPara##Against this background, the strengthening in the US dollar exchange rate against the euro was perhaps not surprising. The relative growth rates of the two regions   both absolutely and relative to expectations   meant that US dollar assets would be seen as continuing to offer relatively attractive returns.##NewPara##Sterling s effective exchange rate, which had enjoyed a long period of relative stability in a range around  until it began to depreciate in February, now seemed to have stabilised in a similar range centred just below  and had changed little since the Committee s August meeting. The market expectation, as reflected in Consensus forecasts, was that it would remain at about this level; uncertainty about sterling had fallen and the risks around its current level   as implied by option prices##NewPara##were close to balanced. That seemed reasonable, as the estimated UK current account deficit was small given the United Kingdom s relative cyclical position. But there were risks in both directions. On the one hand, the profitability of the UK tradeable goods and services sectors might still not be high enough to sustain the current net trade position in the longer term, which would imply that sterling could depreciate further. On the other hand, the scale of the US current account deficit suggested that the US dollar would eventually weaken. If it did so while growth prospects in the euro area were also weak, sterling could become an attractive alternative for international investors currently accumulating US dollar assets.##NewPara##Other UK asset prices were broadly consistent with the improved macroeconomic outlook: the increase in equity prices, for example, was broadly based and suggested both improved expectations of corporate earnings and (relative to the market trough) a lower risk premium. Indices based on equities of smaller companies had generally made larger gains than the main indices.   Such companies tended    to be more sensitive to the business cycle and investors were, perhaps, regaining their appetite for riskier assets. In addition, the increase of around  basis points in shorter-term sterling bond yields   though less marked than that in dollar bond yields   also pointed to a more optimistic market view of economic prospects.##NewPara##UK money and credit indicators showed a slowing in household deposit growth in July, but a further increase in the twelve-month growth rate of household borrowing. There had been a gap between the growth rates of these two measures for some time, but it had widened further. Of course, whereas these borrowing data covered the majority of household borrowing, the deposits data represented only part of households  acquisition of financial assets. The widening gap might be accounted for by households  increased accumulation of other financial assets such as unit trusts.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The disjunction between indicators of output and expenditure in the United Kingdom had, if anything, increased as a result of data releases in the past month. Contrary to the Committee s expectation a month ago, GDP growth in the second quarter was still estimated to have been only .%. But consumption was estimated to have increased by .% in the second quarter. This was well above expectations, as was the .% increase in final domestic demand. With inventories (including the statistical alignment adjustment) adding . percentage points to growth in the quarter, compared with an expectation of no contribution, total domestic demand had been substantially stronger than was embodied in the August central projection. The latest GDP release did not, however, incorporate any of the recent fraud-related adjustments to trade. When those adjustments were made, the drag on GDP growth in the second quarter from net trade would be smaller. Further, upward, revisions to exports were also likely, as delays in the processing of incomplete shipment details were rectified.##NewPara##The implausibility of this pattern of demand, and the prospect of further revisions to net trade, implied either that there would be some large downward revisions to components of domestic demand or that output growth would be revised up. Though consumption was, historically, less subject to revision than other components of demand, recent outturns were unusually volatile. In addition, the reported strength of retail sales in recent months was hard to reconcile with survey information, and overall consumption growth seemed remarkably strong even if those data were taken at face value. Inventory accumulation was another obvious candidate for revision. On the basis of the current data, however, it was difficult to be at all confident that the current estimates of quarterly growth rates were reliable. It was as a result difficult to determine whether there had been a slowing in the underlying pace of consumption growth in the first half of the year, or whether there had simply been a temporary dip in the first quarter.##NewPara##Despite these puzzles about the second quarter data, most of the information so far available about the third quarter was consistent with GDP growth returning to around trend, as projected in the August Inflation Report. Retail sales had fallen back in July, although by less than expected. This tended to suggest that the June data were perhaps less erratically strong than previously thought, and so pointed to underlying strength in retail sales. There was also clear evidence of a revival in the housing market. The slowing in house price inflation seemed to have paused in the past few months, contrary to the Committee s projection of continued easing; survey data from the Royal Institution of##NewPara##Chartered Surveyors were much more positive; loan approvals and particulars delivered had increased; and the Agents  contacts reported a pick-up in market activity. In addition, equity prices had risen and the growth rate of secured borrowing had increased. Both implied a more buoyant near- term outlook for household consumption growth than expected a month or two ago. Growth in notes and coin had, however, eased and consumer confidence was a little softer, so the indications were not unambiguously strong. On the output side, business surveys   particularly those undertaken for the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply   were also indicative of a return to trend growth in the third quarter, in line with or a little above the August Inflation Report projection.##NewPara##Though house price inflation was not now falling as fast as expected, it was premature to conclude that the slowing would not resume. There had been no change in the underlying reasons for expecting house price inflation to ease, though   as before   it was hard to know at what level house prices would be in equilibrium with household incomes. The regions in which prices were now increasing fastest were those which historically showed the least cyclical variation; and the sharpest slowdown had occurred in London and the South East, historically the most cyclical regions.##NewTopic##The labour market, costs and prices##NewPara##Employment was continuing to grow steadily, despite the apparently slow growth in output in the first half of the year, and the overall employment rate to edge upwards   with increases in the employment rate of older people more than offsetting falls in younger age-groups. Unemployment had fallen a little, though the trend could still be characterised as flat. The data implied that productivity had not changed much in the first half of the year, in either heads or hours terms, which lent some support to the suggestion that the estimate of output in the second quarter was likely to be revised up. In terms of annual rates, however, hourly productivity growth was close to its historical average and the employment data could be reconciled with output by the increase in the share of part-time employment and by the persistent downward trend in average hours per worker.##NewPara##There was little news on pay, with the fall in headline earnings growth largely accounted for by the timing of bonus payments. The wide differential between public sector and private sector earnings growth, which had opened up in recent quarters, was little changed. Pay settlements had edged up but remained surprisingly muted, given the April increase in National Insurance contributions and other##NewPara##factors reducing the growth of real personal disposable incomes. Overall, there were still few signs of inflationary pressure from the labour market.##NewPara##RPIX inflation had been .% in July, a little stronger than expected, and there might be some upside risks to the projection in the near term as a result of the impact of recent hot weather on food prices and of the faster-than-expected pace of house price inflation. But there was no clear reason to revise the assessment that inflation would fall back towards target in the second half of the year, as recent temporary upside influences ceased to affect the index.##NewPara##There were some indications of pressures further back in the pricing chain, with input price inflation picking up in recent months, to .% in July. Most of the increase was accounted for by oil prices and domestic food prices. Similarly, output price inflation (excluding duties) had also picked up##NewPara##though only to .%. The rate excluding petroleum products was, at .%, the fastest for nearly seven years. Again, food prices had played a part but the increase seemed to be broadly based. Metals prices too were higher. But these were volatile and accounted for only a small share of costs, and so were of limited significance in terms of pressures on RPIX inflation.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The Reuters poll of economists showed a mean probability of % attached to a  no change  decision this month, with none of the respondents expecting the Committee to vote to change the repo rate. A slightly greater likelihood was attached in this poll to a reduction than to an increase, but a clear majority believed that rates were now at a trough.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee agreed that recent outturns were broadly consistent with the central projections for activity and inflation included in the August Inflation Report, though the balance of risks might now be rather different. The policy decision this month therefore depended mainly on the assessment of how those risks might have changed, in three key areas: first, the strength and durability of the world recovery, and its implications for UK external demand; second, the prospects for UK domestic demand, given the unexpected resilience of consumption growth and the continued rapid accumulation##NewPara##of debt by households; and third, the extent of the pass-through to RPIX inflation of sterling s depreciation since last autumn.##NewPara##Overall, most members judged that the world recovery was broadly in line with their central expectation   though perhaps, given the disappointing euro-area data, a little weaker in terms of its implications for UK external demand. Some members, however, while conceding that the past month s data on euro-area activity were weaker than expected, took comfort from the rather more positive current and forward-looking survey indicators that the euro area was now more likely to match expectations in the second half of the year. In addition, for most members, the near-term##NewPara##downside risks to world activity appeared to have receded in the past month and the projected recovery##NewPara##at least, in the second half of this year   now seemed to be more assured. But there remained uncertainty about the strength and durability of the US recovery: the weak labour market continued to represent a downside risk to consumption, and it was not yet clear that the investment recovery would be sustained.##NewPara##In terms of output in the United Kingdom, the downside news, relative to the August Inflation Report, was that the estimate of output in the second quarter had not been revised up. Indicators of output growth in the third quarter were, however, consistent with the projection that growth would quickly return to trend. In addition, the consumption growth recorded in the second quarter was surprisingly strong. There were also a number of indications   in the revival of activity in the housing market, in the retail sales data and in household borrowing growth   that this strength had continued into the third quarter. Taken together, this raised the possibility that consumption growth had not in fact started to slow, but had simply been temporarily weak in the first quarter, and that the projected profile for consumption growth might therefore be understated, particularly in the near term. If so, the stimulus provided to domestic demand by the current level of interest rates might prove to be more than was needed   given the projected recovery in external demand   to maintain prospective demand in line with the economy s supply capacity in the medium term.##NewPara##Related to the apparent strength of consumption, the continued rapid growth of household debt suggested to some members that the current pace of consumption growth might be based on over- optimistic expectations of future income growth or real interest rates. The longer that continued, the greater was the risk of a sharp downward adjustment to consumption, threatening the achievement of the inflation target in the longer term.##NewPara##Recent data on costs and prices suggested little change in the prospects for RPIX inflation in the medium term. Pay pressures remained muted, though they could increase if concerns about the possibility of unemployment were to ease or if there was a delayed reaction to the increases earlier in the year in National Insurance contributions and other taxes. Members agreed that, given sterling s depreciation since last Autumn, imported goods and services were the more likely current source of inflationary pressures. Pressures at the input price and output price levels had if anything increased a little, but by no more than was consistent with the assumptions made in recent Inflation Report projections about the extent and timing of the pass-through of sterling exchange rate movements to UK domestic prices. Inflation expectations seemed to be firmly anchored to the target.##NewPara##All members of the Committee agreed that it was particularly difficult to assess the current state of the UK economy, given the great uncertainties surrounding recent GDP data. Those uncertainties might be reduced by data releases in the coming month and by the accumulation of more information about output and demand in the third quarter.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that these considerations, taken together, suggested that it was not necessary to change interest rates this month in order to meet the inflation target.##NewPara##For most members, this decision was clear-cut, although for some it was more finely balanced. The decision to reduce the repo rate in July had in part been precautionary, in the face of external and domestic downside risks. Now that those risks had eased, the need for that additional stimulus to UK demand and activity, to ensure that inflation remained on target in the medium term, was to those members no longer so clear. Concerns about the longer-term sustainability of the current pace of consumption growth and household debt accumulation also suggested to some members that an increase in interest rates might soon become necessary. However, market interest rates had already firmed a little. That would restrain consumption growth somewhat, even in the absence of an immediate increase in official rates.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.