The world economy##NewPara##The Committee began by examining recent developments in the world economy. On balance, the news in the UK s major export markets had been adverse, and the picture for external demand was at least as weak as envisaged at the time of the May Inflation Report.##NewPara##On Japan there was great uncertainty about the likely path of real activity given the fall in output in  Q, and other forecasters were still revising down their projections for . There was uncertainty about the likely policy response of the authorities, especially in the context of the elections to the upper house due on  July. The MPC also discussed the possibility that prospects for a recovery in output hinged on corporate as well as financial sector structural adjustment and how long the recovery in activity would take. The Committee agreed that prospects for the Japanese economy had deteriorated over the past month.##NewPara##The world economy projections used as an input to the May Inflation Report incorporated a deceleration of activity in the United States. In the light of the strong  Q GDP data, the Committee discussed whether such a deceleration was still the most likely outcome. In particular, the lags between developments in Asia and their impact on US activity were highly uncertain. But a further rise in the US trade deficit seemed likely, which would restrain output growth. The recovery in continental Europe was continuing broadly as expected, but recent data in Germany had been weaker than in France.##NewPara##There was now clear evidence of falling output in a number of Asian economies. Developments in the real economy in, for example, Indonesia were at least as serious as in the financial sectors of the economy. There had been speculation about the possible impact on the##NewPara##world economy if China were to devalue and whether this would have implications for other countries beyond the direct trade effects, particularly through its impact on Hong Kong. The immediate prospects in several countries outside Asia, for example South Africa and Russia, had worsened over the past month. Recent developments in the world economy would be taken into account in the context of the August Inflation Report.##NewTopic##The fiscal position##NewPara##The Committee discussed the briefing previously received from Treasury officials on the Economic and Fiscal Strategy Report (EFSR). On the expenditure side, the new fiscal plans were for somewhat higher expenditure by the third fiscal year than had been incorporated in the May Inflation Report projections, although a lower starting point in the first year and slightly higher revenue were offsetting factors.##NewPara##The Committee thought there was a degree of uncertainty about the revenue projections, which now assumed that more of the recent buoyancy in revenue associated with the move to self-assessment would be permanent. Overall, the Committee agreed that there seemed to be little news in terms of the impact on inflation over the next two years or so from the aggregate expenditure projections. The impact of the latest plans would be incorporated into the Committee s August Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the possible implications of the expenditure plans for public sector pay. Public sector settlements had for some time been below those in the private sector, but the gap between public and private sector earnings growth was much larger   there was negative wage drift in the public sector. Restructuring in the public sector explained some of this recent trend in wage drift, as some higher paid staff were replaced by lower paid staff. There was a question of how long these structural changes could be maintained. Since the fiscal plans entailed binding nominal expenditure limits on departments, any reduction in negative wage drift (and hence relatively higher public sector earnings growth) would have to be offset by lower spending elsewhere. But it might imply a change in the price/output split, which would affect the Committee s inflation projection.##NewPara##There was some discussion of whether financial markets had reacted to the prospect of higher future government spending. But there had been little change in either bond yields or market implied forward interest rates immediately following the announcement of the E FSR.##NewTopic##Domestic demand, output and unemployment##NewPara##The Committee then discussed output and domestic demand. There had been a small upward revision to  Q domestic demand growth in the National Accounts release, offset by a small downward revision to net trade. GDP growth remained at .% in Q. Investment growth in Q was now estimated to be slightly stronger than assumed in the May forecast, rather than weaker. Notwithstanding the revisions to the expenditure components of GDP, the overall pace of output growth was broadly as expected at the time of the May Inflation Report.##NewPara##Estimate of GDP growth in Q, based on a range of monthly indicators and survey evidence, were a little stronger than in the central projection in the May Inflation Report. But this was a preliminary estimate, on which the Committee did not place much weight, though it provided a useful benchmark against which the official figures could be judged when published on  July. More recently, there were signs in the surveys that service sector output growth might be slowing, for example in the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply survey, but this was from an above-trend growth rate. Construction growth still appeared to be increasing.##NewPara##The expenditure data for Q indicated a slightly weaker picture than that coming from the output indicators. Consumer confidence had fallen, but retail sales had been strong in May. Retail sales may have been affected by poor weather in April and June and, given the survey and anecdotal evidence for June, the Committee thought that it would be best to look at the May figures in the context of a run of data.##NewPara##As regards the labour market, the rate of decline of LFS unemployment was broadly in line with the May Inflation Report projection. The central projection in the May Inflation Report had envisaged that the fall in unemployment would soon cease, and that there would be little change over the next two years given the projection for GDP growth. A rise in unemployment would be needed, in order to check earnings growth and return inflation to target, but how much and how fast? One view was that the recent rise in earnings growth contained some news on the natural rate of unemployment, and that the labour market was now more clearly below it. Hence a more substantial rise in unemployment than in the May Report projections would be needed. On another view, the rise in earnings, though somewhat surprising, largely reflected past movements in profitability, and was therefore a backward##NewPara##looking indicator. In that case, it provided new information about lags in the economy, but not much about medium-term prospects for inflation.##NewPara##Recruitment difficulties and skill shortages were even more acute in the latest surveys, and seemed to be prevalent across all sectors and regions of the economy. Changes in employment and unemployment lag changes in output, and although the lag appeared to have shortened in the recovery in the early s, it was still evident. So the slowing of output growth may not yet be feeding through to the recruitment surveys. This might be rationalised at the firm level if there were lags between the level of activity in sales and marketing departments and changes in personnel department s recruitment plans. But how could the recruitment surveys be reconciled with the slower rate of decline in unemployment? One possible explanation was an increase in job turnover, which would lead survey respondents to report increased difficulty in recruiting and retaining staff, even when the same number were employed. Another possibility was that recruitment difficulties were related to the level of unemployment rather than to its rate of change.##NewPara##The Committee discussed how the surveys could shed light on the level of tightness in the labour market. This was particularly difficult as the various surveys pointed to different degrees of tightness. In particular, the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) Industrial Trends Survey pointed to less severe labour shortages than in the late s, whereas the British Chambers of Commerce survey indicated that recruitment difficulties in both manufacturing and service industries were at least as great. Given that service and manufacturing firms were often competing for the same labour, how could these surveys be reconciled? The Committee thought that the difference possibly reflected the nature of the questions asked in the surveys. For example, the CBI survey asked whether shortages of labour were a constraint on output. Given the recent path of output and orders it was not surprising that this was not reported as a serious constraint in manufacturing. In understanding the path of earnings growth it was unclear how much explanatory power the relevant questions in these surveys added to the information already contained in unemployment figures, particularly given the short run of data for most of the series.##NewTopic##Prices and earnings##NewPara##The Committee then turned to developments in nominal variables, and particularly prices and earnings. The focus of the labour market discussion was on the increase in earnings growth##NewPara##and the extent to which it was accounted for by bonus payments. The importance of bonuses in the twelve-month rate of increase of earnings was likely to diminish over the next few months, but the precise time path was unclear. Bonus payments should anyway not be ignored because they are a real cost to employers, though it was natural to smooth the effects over the course of a year. Unfortunately, the ONS monthly earnings survey did not precisely identify the bonus component of pay, so identifying the contribution to earnings growth from this source was still rather uncertain.##NewPara##Comparing earnings growth with pay settlements suggested a contribution from wage drift of   percentage points or so, which did not seem abnormal given previous experience and the stage in the cycle. A question remained concerning the size of the gap between private and public sector earnings growth, which had been large over the past few years according to the ONS average earnings figures.##NewPara##Retail price inflation had turned out significantly higher than expected in May, but it was not obvious how to choose between various competing explanations. One possible explanation was that unexpectedly strong earnings growth was feeding through to inflation, but this did not seem to explain all of the rise. A second explanation was that there was less pass-through from the exchange rate appreciation than had been expected. A third explanation was that the rise was due to erratic factors, which had no obvious implications for the medium-term inflation projection. Evidence for this could be gauged by looking at the unexpected rise in seasonal food prices. A fourth explanation might be the raising of prices ahead of summer sales, which again might be only a temporary timing effect. The rise in clothing and footwear prices could reflect this factor. Or it could reflect the strong rise in retail sales volumes for these goods, which may have indicated stronger demand. Finally, taking the past few months as a whole, the rise in the housing depreciation component of RPIX had been unexpectedly strong. In sum, it was difficult to draw firm conclusions about the significance of the higher-than-expected May retail prices figures for future inflation.##NewPara##From a longer perspective it was worth noting that since the introduction of the MPC arrangements in May , inflation had been at or above the target, and month-by-month inflation had tended to turn out slightly higher than the Committee had expected. Looking back just over a year, the central projection published in the May  Inflation Report was for inflation in  at or below  %. That projection was made at a lower nominal interest rate, a lower exchange rate, and before the various budget announcements.##NewTopic##The National Minimum Wage and other policy changes affecting the labour market##NewPara##The Government had announced the details of the National Minimum Wage, and members and staff of the Low Pay Commission (LPC) had briefed the MPC on the details of their report. The LPC s estimate of the direct effect of the NMW on the wage bill was .%. The LPC had assumed full compliance with the minimum wage and that the restoration of wage differentials would not be a significant factor. The Committee discussed factors affecting the size of the impact on the price level, and on inflation over the next few years. A plausible starting point might be a proportionate rise in prices of two thirds of the percentage increase in the wage bill. But the timing of this was uncertain: the rise in prices might come through quite quickly or be spread over a number of years. The fact that the details of the NMW were known well before its implementation was a reason for assuming a more rapid effect. Although it was of primary importance to estimate the impact on wage costs and inflation, the Committee thought that the minimum wage would also raise the natural rate of unemployment.##NewPara##The Committee agreed it was important to assess the impact of the minimum wage alongside an analysis of the other Government measures affecting the labour market. It discussed the potential size of any effects of the Welfare-to-Work and tax/benefit measures (such as the Working Families Tax Credit and childcare subsidies) on the natural rate of unemployment. Estimates of both the timing and magnitude were necessarily highly uncertain. There could be quite rapid effects if, for example, the New Deal had a significant impact on the initial stock of young and long-term unemployed. It was possible that the effects from the tax/benefit changes could be significant in increasing activity rates, given the evidence on the labour supply elasticities of those most likely to be affected by these changes.##NewPara##Looking forward, it would be important to be able to distinguish between changes in unemployment that reflected changes in labour market tightness, and any changes which came about because of the introduction of the Government s NMW, the tax/benefits reforms and the Welfare-to-Work initiatives. The New Deal programme started nationally in April, so there were no effects yet in the unemployment statistics. But monitoring processes had been set up which would identify the effect of the New Deal on unemployment. The Committee s assessment of the impact of the Government s labour market policies on inflation would be incorporated into the August Inflation Report projections.##NewTopic##Monetary conditions##NewPara##Money growth had slowed in June, and the twelve-month rate of growth of M was now back below %. The Committee considered that the slow decline in the annual growth rate over recent months was probably consistent with a slowdown in demand and somewhat higher inflation, and that it would be worrying if monetary growth were not slowing by now.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the market reaction to the interest rate increase on  June. The announcement had come as a surprise to the markets and, coupled with data releases later in the month, had pushed short sterling implied forward interest rates up by more than  basis points some two years ahead. Since the path implied for interest rates had previously been downward sloping, the effect was to push further into the future the time when markets expected interest rate cuts. The sterling effective exchange rate had risen slightly since the June meeting, and a large part of this could be accounted for by changes in market expectations of UK relative to overseas interest rates.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee agreed that there had been a further deterioration in the prospects for the world economy. In the case of Japan the question was how bad things would get, given the current stance of policy. News on Japan continued to be offset to some extent by the strength of the United States. Growth in the EU was holding up, although there were differences across the major EU countries. The exchange rate had risen slightly over the past month, and the deterioration in UK net exports was coming through in the first quarter. The monthly trade figures pointed to further deterioration in net exports in  Q. So overall the net trade picture was, if anything, a little weaker than expected at the time of the Inflation Report, with further risks on the downside.##NewPara##Despite the upward revision to  Q, the Committee was more confident that domestic demand was slowing. And the slowdown appeared to be spreading to the service sector, although much of the evidence of slower growth in the service sectors came from surveys. Taking external and domestic demand together, the real side of the economy looked to be broadly on the track expected at the time of the Inflation Report. Evidence from the demand side in Q might be slightly weaker than on the output side, but this was still highly uncertain.##NewPara##The slowing in the rate of decline in unemployment looked consistent with developments in demand and output, and was also broadly consistent with the May Inflation Report projection. The level of pressure in the labour market was less clear, but was probably still high given the recent evidence on recruitment difficulties. Looking ahead, some rise in unemployment was likely later in the year, and was probably necessary to contain pressure on wages and earnings. Both inflation and earnings growth had risen on the month. The Committee felt that some of the rise in retail prices was erratic, and could therefore be discounted, but noted that inflation had turned out to be a little higher over most of the previous year than had been anticipated. Despite the real economy developing broadly as expected, there were signs that nominal variables were turning out worse than expected. This could be because the lags between output growth and its effect on inflation were longer than expected, or it could be because the short-run trade-off between the two was less favourable than predicted.##NewPara##The Committee had considered the announcements on fiscal policy and the National Minimum Wage. The fiscal announcements appeared not to contain much news for inflation up to two years ahead. But more work needed to be done to quantify the effect of the E FSR and the aggregate effect on the labour market from the NMW, Welfare-to-Work and the tax/benefit changes. Further analysis would take place in the context of the August Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##There was an argument for a further immediate rise in interest rates. Even if unemployment stabilised at its current level there would be further pressure on earnings growth if unemployment were below the natural rate. A similar argument could be made in respect of capacity output, if the level of output was above potential. Therefore, a rise in unemployment back towards its natural rate   and a period of below trend output growth   would be required to return earnings growth to a rate that was consistent with meeting the inflation target in the medium term. But this could be achieved either through a sharp correction, or a more protracted adjustment.##NewPara##Even if it was more likely than not that official interest rates would have to rise again, there were two reasons for waiting another month. First, there had been a lot of news over the period since the June MPC meeting. And the news was such that it was difficult to form a quantitative assessment of the overall impact on the medium-term inflation projection and of the size of any interest rate increase that might be required. In these circumstances it made sense to wait for an assessment in the quarterly Inflation Report forecast round, which was an important##NewPara##part of the monetary policy process. Second, although demand was slowing broadly as expected the economy had only just passed the turning point and there were risks that activity could slow more quickly than expected   so that there was more to be learned over the next month.##NewPara##It was also argued that there was no need for a further rise in interest rates, and indeed on one view there was a case for an immediate reduction in interest rates. The impact of the June rise in official interest rates had been amplified in financial markets by expectations of further rises, which could be seen as an extra degree of tightening. The exchange rate had strengthened slightly on the month and was close to the level at the time of the May Report. Past interest rate increases were still feeding through. The greatest challenge at this point, given the lags in the operation of policy, was to judge when to stop raising rates and allow the cumulative tightening already in place to have its effects. There were already clear signs of a slowdown in domestic demand as well as a sharp weakening in exports. It was possible that the prospective slowdown in aggregate demand was already sufficient to produce an easing in the labour market consistent with meeting the inflation target in the medium-term.##NewPara##The case for a reduction in interest rates had become less clear in the light of the Government s recent announcements on fiscal strategy, which raised new concerns about the medium-term inflation outlook. On this view it would be prudent to delay a cut in interest rates until these policies could be examined fully in the August Inflation Report round.##NewPara##The Committee then voted unanimously in favour of leaving the Bank s repo rate unchanged.