The world economy##NewPara##The news on the world economy was on balance positive. In the United States, there were early signs that economic recovery in the second half of  might be in prospect. Non-farm payrolls had fallen by , in December, a much smaller fall than in November. The Institute of Supply Managers  (ISM) (formerly NAPM) non-manufacturing survey index had increased to . in December, the highest level since December , from . in November, and the corresponding manufacturing survey index was also higher. Business confidence indicators had recovered to above the pre-September  level, while consumer confidence had also picked up. The rate of decline of activity in the information and communications technology (ICT) sector had eased over recent months. Most outside forecasters were beginning to raise their forecasts for US GDP growth in , and were coming closer to the Committee s own projection at the time of the November Inflation Report.##NewPara##There were still considerable uncertainties associated with this outlook. It was possible that the shock in September had bought forward some redundancies which were already planned. In that case it might be too early to interpret the smaller fall in payrolls in December than in October and  November as signifying an end to the labour market slowdown which had started earlier in the year. While the inventory correction was probably nearly complete, it was less clear that surplus productive capacity had been eliminated and so that the investment slowdown had ended. And the longer-term imbalances in the economy had not been corrected: the saving ratio remained low; the current##NewPara##account was in substantial deficit; and the profit expectations implicit in equity values still appeared to be high. US market interest rates had reacted sharply to the more positive economic indicators, and this in itself might restrain the recovery: for example, it might reduce the potential for further remortgaging at lower interest rates which had up to now probably helped to sustain consumption, and it would increase the cost of finance to business.##NewPara##In the euro area, the picture was mixed. Industrial production and retail sales had both fallen in October, the latest month for which area-wide data were available. More recently, the euro-area Purchasing Managers  Index (PMI) for the service sector, and the European Commission measures for business and consumer confidence, had all risen in December, although they were still low in levels terms. There was some evidence that activity in Germany was weaker than in the rest of the euro area. Most outside forecasts for euro-area activity in  were below the November Inflation Report projection. However, the decline in inflation, reinforced by the recent weakness of oil prices, would work to support real incomes and therefore consumption.##NewPara##The Japanese economy remained weak, and the December Tankan survey showed a further fall in business confidence since September. With this in mind, the Committee considered the possible implications of the planned reduction at end-March  of the current comprehensive guarantee for bank deposits. Interbank deposits would effectively no longer be protected.  If individual banks ran into difficulties, public support might be required. It was suggested that this could entail an increase in government bond issuance and a sharp rise in bond yields which could be exacerbated by a fall in the yen, which on balance might further weaken Japanese activity. However, deposit insurance would remain in place, so there was no reason to expect a widespread withdrawal from the banking system.##NewPara##It was encouraging that there had so far been little contagion from the recent developments in Argentina. Several of the emerging market economies in Asia were now showing signs of recovery, helped by the improving prospects for the ICT sector in the United States. Growth in China, however, may have begun to slow towards the end of .##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##There had been a significant rise, of some  basis points at a one-year maturity, in short-term UK market interest rates since the Committee s previous meeting. The central expectation implied by short-term interest rates was that the Bank s repo rate would not be reduced further. Market participants had apparently interpreted some key indicators, in the United Kingdom and abroad, as suggesting stronger-than-expected prospects for demand, and had given these indicators more weight than the continuing evidence of weak current inflationary pressure. By contrast, survey evidence suggested a lower profile for the Bank s repo rate over the next year than was implied by market rates. The latest Reuters  survey of economists indicated a unanimous expectation that there would be no##NewPara##change in the Bank s repo rate this month.##NewPara##Sterling s effective exchange rate was about % higher than at the time of the Committee s previous meeting, reflecting rises of over % against the dollar,  % against the euro and % against the yen. Renewed speculation regarding a move towards EMU entry might otherwise have weakened sterling, so the rise on the month suggested that it was well-supported at the present level.##NewPara##The annual rate of growth of households  deposits had increased in November to over %, and households  borrowing to nearly %; both rates were at ten-year highs. Mortgage equity withdrawal had risen from .% of total household post-tax income in the first quarter of  to .% in the third quarter.##NewPara##The rate of increase in house prices had risen in December, and the rates recorded ( % on the Halifax index and % on the Nationwide) for  as a whole were the highest rates in any single year since . The rate of increase was consistent with the growth of households  deposits and borrowing, but the renewed acceleration was surprising. One possible explanation was that some households were induced to increase their borrowing by low current nominal rates of interest   the proportionate reduction in mortgage servicing costs associated with the reduction in the repo rate from % to % had been very large   and were ignoring the fact that the real burden of the loan would no longer be eroded to the same extent by inflation as in the past. If that were the case, adjustment to this misperception might take some time. Alternatively, strong demand for housing might reflect the low returns available on other investments, given that equity returns had been negative and retail deposit rates were low.##NewTopic##Demand and Output##NewPara##Anecdotal evidence, supported by reports from the Bank s regional Agents, the CBI Distributive Trades survey and the latest GfK consumer confidence survey, suggested that strong growth in retail sales had been maintained over the Christmas period. Although consumption had itself grown by % in real terms over the year to the third quarter, and by % in that quarter, the difference between retail sales and consumption growth was at its largest for  years. It was possible that consumption of services not captured in the retail sales data, such as travel and tourism, had been adversely affected, first by the foot-and-mouth epidemic and then by fears about the safety of international travel.##NewPara##Households  expenditure on durables had risen by over % in the year to  Q.##NewPara##Several factors might have influenced the rise in consumption and the associated continuing low level of the saving ratio. First, the rise in durables expenditure could in degree represent a decision by households to invest in real rather than financial assets, given the low returns available on the latter. Second, the rise in house prices had facilitated an increase in mortgage equity withdrawal. It was possible that this increase in the availability of credit at relatively low interest rates meant that the economy was going through a transitional period in which the rate of growth of debt was temporarily higher while consumers adjusted towards a higher desired ratio of consumption to income. That could imply a relatively gradual slowdown in consumption growth as the new equilibrium level was approached. Third, against the background of strong recent increases in post-tax real income, households might be basing their consumption decisions on an assumption of future income growth which might be unsustainably high.  In that case, consumption could be vulnerable to shocks to income or unemployment that led to a downward revision to expected income growth, while higher household indebtedness implied that an increase in interest rates would also have a greater impact than in the past.##NewPara##Given the continuing strength of consumption, it was perhaps surprising that import growth had recently been modest, but the weakness of investment in machinery and equipment, which had a high import content, had been an offsetting influence.##NewPara##The revisions in the latest National Accounts data had been relatively modest. The level of output in  Q was slightly higher than previously thought. The level of consumption had been revised down, while the levels of whole economy investment and government consumption had been revised up. Consumption growth in the third quarter was less strong, and investment growth less weak, than earlier reported. The recent weakness of industrial production had lowered estimates of likely GDP growth in  Q.##NewPara##The latest survey evidence presented a mixed picture. The December Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) survey of manufacturing had shown a fall in output, though the rate of contraction of new orders had eased. The survey for  Q by the Engineering Employers  Federation had been very weak. The CIPS services survey had shown a rise in all components of the index, while the Agents reported that the decline in stocks was nearing an end.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Data over the past month suggested that labour market conditions had continued to ease, but perhaps less rapidly than expected. LFS unemployment had risen each month from July to October, and claimant count unemployment had risen slightly in both October and November. Inflows to unemployment were rising, as would be expected in an economic slowdown, but the rate of outflows from unemployment was still high, so that many of those losing their jobs might still be confident of getting another one.##NewPara##Average earnings growth had changed little since July. The contribution from bonuses was still strongly negative, and it was likely that this component could give rise to large month-to-month movements over the next few months, during which bonus payments were concentrated. Weak profitability in several parts of the financial services sector could continue to depress bonuses, although the need to retain staff might mean that the effects of lower profits would not feed through fully.##NewPara##Whole economy productivity had increased by .% in the year to  Q, a fall of . percentage points from the Q figure. Since mid-, productivity growth had been below its long- run annual average rate of around % in some  out of  quarters. Other things equal, lower productivity growth implied upward pressure on unit wage costs. It was uncertain how rapidly productivity growth would rise in the coming quarters as employment growth slowed.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Other pressures on inflation were unusually weak. The oil price had risen to around $ per barrel, an increase of about $ per barrel since the Committee s previous meeting but still below the level at the time of the November Inflation Report. The Economist index of commodity prices had fallen by % in sterling terms in the year to December. The UK import price deflator showed a fall of over % in  Q, reflecting declines in a range of different trade categories. Manufacturing input prices had fallen by % in the year to November, and manufacturing output prices had fallen by %, which was the lowest figure since comparable records began in , in the same period. This in part reflected the particular weakness of the manufacturing sector. Prices of retail services were more buoyant, although the CIPS services survey showed the balance of prices charged below  for the##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The Committee considered again the possible implications for policy of the growing imbalances in the economy: on the demand side, the strength in consumption compared with investment, and of domestic relative to external demand, and, associated with that, the growth in the stock of household indebtedness and the growing and accumulating current account deficit; and on the output side, the gap between growth in the internationally tradable and non-tradable sectors. Monetary policy over the past year had been set so as to compensate for weaker external demand by reducing interest rates to support domestic demand. This strategy had so far achieved its aim of keeping inflation close to the target rate by maintaining aggregate demand growth close to potential supply, but necessarily at the cost of widening the imbalances further.##NewPara##It was possible that consumer demand would moderate at the same time as external demand strengthened. The Committee nevertheless reviewed the medium-term risks to maintaining that policy stance if external demand remained weak. Various scenarios were suggested. First, the growing current account deficit could imply a future risk of a large fall in the exchange rate and therefore of higher inflation, although the timing and extent of such a shock, and its effect on inflation, were uncertain. Second, the growth of household indebtedness increased the risk of an abrupt adjustment to consumption at some point, and in those circumstances it might be more difficult to sustain demand with further interest rate reductions. Third, if the business sector came to believe that the level of household indebtedness, and consequently the rate of consumption growth, were becoming unsustainable, investment could be inhibited and might not respond positively to reductions in interest rates. More generally, the greater the imbalances, the more uncertain would be the future path of inflation. Furthermore, the impact of monetary policy on inflation might also be less predictable than otherwise. Under these scenarios, in order to deter households from accumulating unsustainable levels of debt and so reduce the risk of larger deviations (on either the upside or the downside) of inflation from the target further ahead, it might be necessary to accept inflation remaining a little below target over the two-year horizon.##NewPara##The risks from such a policy were discussed. First, if the amount by which inflation was allowed to undershoot the target were to be substantial, there would be a risk that a downside shock to activity##NewPara##or prices could cause deflation, in which case it might be difficult to ease monetary policy by enough to restore inflation to target. Second, maintaining interest rates at a level at which inflation was expected to undershoot the target two years out risked lowering investment and productive capacity below where it would otherwise have been. While income would also be lower, the imbalances between demand and supply might be worse, so tending to raise inflation in the longer-term future.##NewPara##Third, there would be a risk of some loss of public understanding, so the reasons for the policy would have to be explained particularly carefully. Fourth, if interest rates were higher than they would otherwise be, the imbalances would be exacerbated if the exchange rate were also higher.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Over the month, there had been a number of unexpectedly positive indicators from the United States, and the revival of confidence suggested that the effects on demand of the terrorist attacks had been temporary. Euro-area indicators were mixed and the Japanese economy remained weak. It was possible that international financial markets had overreacted to the early signs of prospective US recovery: the likelihood was that the first half of  would see continued weak global activity, and rapid recovery later in the year was not yet assured. In the United Kingdom, retail sales, household borrowing and house prices were stronger than had been expected two months ago, and imbalances in the economy had widened. RPIX inflation was a little below target, and inflationary pressures were weak.##NewPara##Against this background, the Committee agreed that interest rates should remain unchanged this month. There would be a case for a further reduction in interest rates if it was thought likely that consumption would slow before the world economy revived. This might happen as a reaction to rising unemployment and mounting indebtedness. Alternatively, with some positive signs in the past month from the United States allied to continued robust consumer spending over the Christmas period, it was possible that consumption would not slow soon enough, or sharply enough. In that case, a rise in interest rates would be required to keep inflation on track.##NewPara##On balance, and given the available information, there was a reasonable prospect that consumption would slow naturally at broadly the same time that the world economy recovered, allowing the United Kingdom to maintain a growth rate close to trend and inflation close to target. Nor was it clear which sets of risks to this central path, those associated with a more rapid slowdown##NewPara##or with higher inflation, were more likely to occur. A decision to leave interest rates unchanged was therefore consistent with meeting the inflation target going forward. There were, in addition, particular advantages in making no change in rates now. More information on the progress of the next annual wage round would become available over the next month. Moreover, the Committee would be able to make a fuller quantitative assessment of all the recent economic developments in preparing the February Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##For some members, the worsening imbalances posed a particular threat. Real domestic demand growth had exceeded real output growth by .% over the past five years (compared to a peak of .% in the late s). This was unsustainable, and at some stage there could be a sharp correction to the exchange rate in response to a widening current account deficit or to domestic demand as consumers retrenched in the face of rising indebtedness. Although inflationary pressures were subdued at present, a further stimulus to domestic demand at this stage through another cut in interest rates would worsen the imbalances and could make it more difficult to keep inflation close to target in the medium term.##NewPara##For some other members, the choice between a further reduction of  basis points in repo rate and leaving the rate unchanged was finely balanced. Recent Inflation Report projections for inflation had been too high, and the impact of global disinflation had been underestimated. The rate of unemployment below which UK inflation would start to pick up which was implicit in those  projections also appeared too high. While the balance of news on the world economy in the past month had been on the upside, the strength and robustness of the recovery were uncertain. The upturn in global equity markets did not appear fully justified by the prospects for growth and profitability and so was fragile. The possibility of further weakness in Japan, perhaps associated with the prospective reduction in deposit insurance, also posed a downside risk. On balance, consumption growth could be expected to slow, as employment and earnings growth slowed, and as the transition of consumption to a higher equilibrium level consistent with lower interest rates and output volatility was completed.##NewPara##The lower headline rate of inflation and some rise in unemployment might lead to a moderation in pay settlements. Overall, output growth was likely to remain below trend for some time, and inflation consequently to remain below target. Arguments that had been discussed for accepting an undershoot of the inflation target over the two-year horizon did not appear compelling in the current conjuncture. While there were upside risks to inflation from a possible fall in sterling, it was also conceivable that sterling might strengthen further, if the United Kingdom was seen as relatively strong among the major economies. Accordingly, it seemed likely that a further cut in interest rates would be needed soon to##NewPara##bring inflation back to target. However, in the light of the news over the latest month, there were arguments for delay, in particular to gain more information on global economic prospects and on the current UK wage round, and to take all the relevant information into account in the February Inflation Report projections. On balance, therefore, it was preferable to make no change in the repo rate this month.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.