Financial markets##NewPara##The Bank s effective sterling exchange rate had risen by around  % over the past month. Unlike the pattern of the previous month, when sterling had depreciated against the euro and risen against the dollar, sterling had appreciated against both the dollar and the euro. But the main exchange rate news this month had been the further fall in the US dollar.  The effective dollar exchange rate index was now significantly below its peak in early  and had fallen to a nine-year low.  As usual, it was difficult to isolate the precise trigger for the recent depreciation, particularly since commentators had been talking about the risks of a depreciation of the dollar for a considerable time given the United States  present fiscal and current account deficits. It was noted that the elimination of the, rather smaller, US current account deficit in the s had been accompanied by a fall of around % in the dollar s real effective exchange rate.##NewPara##The Committee noted that the depreciation of the dollar against a broader measure of the nominal effective exchange rate index, for example as used by the Federal Reserve, was rather less marked than the fall on some narrower indices. The latter excluded some currencies that had moved closely with the dollar, and might not be as appropriate for estimating the impact on the United States  economy as the broader indices.##NewPara##The movement in exchange rates had been against a backdrop of rising market interest rates in the United States and lower UK and euro-area market interest rate expectations. A natural explanation was that the depreciation of the dollar had been part of the reason for the changes in market interest rate expectations, rather than the other way round. But the changes were also broadly consistent with the economic data. The interest rate expected a year or so ahead, implied by short sterling futures##NewPara##contracts, had fallen by - basis points since the previous meeting. There had been a similar fall in the euro area. Long-term interest rates had also fallen in the United Kingdom and euro area, and risen in the United States.##NewPara##According to the most recent Reuters poll, all  of the economists surveyed expected no change in the repo rate this month. The mean probability attached to  no change  this month was %. That was consistent with anecdotal evidence from market participants and the pattern of very short-term interest rates. The mean expectation for the repo rate at the end of  was now .%.##NewPara##Looking back over the past year or so, the Committee noted the marked fall of over   percentage point in nine-year ahead implied forward real interest rates in both the United Kingdom and euro area. The Committee discussed a number of possible interpretations for the fall in real interest rates, but none were particularly compelling.##NewPara##There had been a small rise in local-currency equity prices across most major industrial markets in the past month. These movements were broadly similar across countries when measured in common currency terms. Despite the sharp movement in the dollar, there had been little sign of significant changes in a wider range of financial markets   for example, in corporate and credit spreads.##NewTopic##The international economy##NewPara##Overall, the data on UK-weighted world economic activity had been weaker this month than expected. There was a weaker near-term outlook for both the euro area and Japan, while the United States was continuing to grow broadly as expected at the time of the November Inflation Report.##NewPara##Euro-area GDP had risen by .% in Q, following growth of .% in Q. This was a little lower than anticipated a month or so ago. It was noted that the latest data for France, in particular, looked weaker than expected. The softness in euro-area net trade in Q was a surprise, and had come before the most recent appreciation of the euro against the dollar. There had been a large positive contribution from inventories to GDP growth. Both the euro-area services and manufacturing Purchasing Managers Indices had fallen in November. Overall, the indicators pointed to slower GDP##NewPara##growth in Q. Furthermore, a number of outside forecasts for  for the euro area had been revised down recently.##NewPara##Japanese GDP appeared to have been broadly flat in both  Q and Q. Indicators appeared to point to weaker activity in Q, in particular industrial production and exports. It was possible that this reflected slower growth in China. There was also evidence of a marked slowdown in some of the information and communications technology (ICT) sectors   for example, sales growth in the world semiconductor market had fallen sharply. The prospects for near-term Japanese growth looked weaker than expected at the time of the November Inflation Report. There were also signs of slower growth elsewhere in Asia.##NewPara##Estimated US GDP growth had been revised up by . percentage points to % in  Q. The dip in growth discussed in the summer and autumn looked less apparent now. The Q indicators seem to point to continued strong household spending. Industrial production had risen strongly in October, and the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) surveys for both manufacturing and non- manufacturing had risen in November. The November non-farm payrolls data had been weaker than the market had expected, but had followed a strong increase in October. Overall, the US economy appeared to be growing in line with the November Inflation Report central projection.##NewPara##The oil price had remained volatile. The spot oil price had fallen substantially over the past month, though the shift down in the oil futures curve had been smaller. The higher oil price had continued to feed through to producer prices in the major overseas economies. Headline producer price inflation had picked up in both the United States and the euro area. Moreover, excluding energy, producer price inflation had risen by around two percentage points in both regions since the middle of . There had been a further acceleration of export prices from the major industrial economies   although this was broadly in line with expectations. But, so far, there were few signs of higher energy prices passing through into consumer prices other than petrol.##NewTopic##Money, credit, demand and output##NewPara##The ONS had estimated GDP growth of .% in Q, unchanged from its preliminary estimate. The main news in the expenditure components was a slightly weaker-than-expected outturn for investment and a slightly stronger outturn for exports and government spending. Consumption growth##NewPara##was broadly in line with expectations. Estimates for Q were, of course, still uncertain and subject to revision.##NewPara##The September Index of Production release had been provided ahead of publication to the Committee at its November meeting. The latest ONS release had shown a further fall in manufacturing production in October. The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) survey manufacturing balance had picked up in November, implying the strongest growth since July, although the CBI Monthly Industrial Trends Survey and the Bank s regional Agents  contacts had painted a more subdued picture. There were also signs of weaker capital goods orders in the fourth quarter. The picture for the service sector in Q remained more robust: the latest CIPS services survey balances for business activity and new orders had both increased in November. The CIPS construction survey had also remained firm. Putting all the evidence together, growth in Q still seemed likely to pick up to around trend, broadly consistent with the November Inflation Report.##NewPara##The data seemed to be consistent with continued moderate consumer spending growth. Retail sales had fallen in October, but by less than expected on the basis of earlier evidence. The CBI Distributive Trades Survey had shown a stronger retail sales balance in November than October. The GfK consumer confidence measure had risen for the second consecutive month and was broadly back to the level recorded in the early summer. That rise in confidence had come despite the fall in house price inflation. Private car registrations had remained weak in November relative to a year ago, but that might simply reflect the earlier unusual strength.##NewPara##The average of the Halifax and Nationwide house price indices had risen by .% in the three months to November, and the latest data were consistent with the central projection in the November Inflation Report. The preview of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) survey showed that the sales-to-stock ratio had fallen, while the net balance of estate agents reporting price increases had fallen to a level comparable with that recorded during  H. Secured borrowing growth continued to ease, and the number of mortgage approvals had fallen for the fifth consecutive month.##NewPara##There were signs of some slowing in the growth of the monetary aggregates in Oc tober, but these had tended to be fairly volatile. The underlying trend in the rate of increase of unsecured household borrowing seemed broadly flat. The annual growth rate of notes and coin had fallen in November.##NewPara##The Government s Pre-Budget Report (PBR) had been published on  December. The PBR forecast for GDP growth was similar to the November Inflation Report central projection for  and , but was stronger in . Government spending on investment for FY/ had been revised down since the  Budget, and the Committee would need to take account of this, and the latest estimates of effective tax rates, in the February Inflation Report projections.##NewTopic##Wages, costs and prices##NewPara##The labour market remained tight, but there was little news on labour market quantities this month. The Labour Force Survey (LFS) measure of employment had increased by enough to hold the employment rate steady in Q. The slower employment growth in the summer seemed broadly consistent with the picture for output growth. The LFS unemployment rate had fallen to .% in Q. There was also a small fall in weighted non-employment on the month, as the fall in unemployment outweighed the continued rise in inactivity. There were signs of a small fall in recruitment advertising in the press in the year to October, according to the Recruitment and Employment Confederation survey. The fall had been concentrated in the public sector.##NewPara##Pay pressures remained muted. Some commentators had noted that settlements were often linked to RPI inflation   which had been rising since the start of . But according to settlements information available to the Bank, the twelve-month average of settlements had been broadly flat throughout , and there were few signs that it had moved closely with RPI over the recent past. The Committee noted that there had been a small rise in the shorter-run three-month measure of settlements in the private sector in October, but it was too soon to place much weight on that.##NewPara##Three-month on three-month growth in regular pay, a measure of current pay pressures, had also risen slightly in September. The growth in the purchasing power of post-tax earnings had strengthened over the past year, which might have helped to reduce pressure on settlements.##NewPara##Supply-chain costs and prices continued to increase. Manufacturers  input prices had risen again in October, although excluding oil, input price inflation was steady. Manufacturers  output prices had continued to accelerate, both including and excluding petroleum products. The headline output price inflation measure was now at its highest since December , with estimates suggesting that manufacturers  margins on domestic sales were expanding. Prices of imported manufactures, which had been falling since , had risen since the beginning of the year. It was difficult to get a clear##NewPara##picture of how far further integration and productivity improvements in the wholesale and retail distribution sectors were influencing margins and profitability in those sectors. The latest quarterly data on retail goods prices, together with estimates of weighted costs in the retail distribution sector, suggested a continuing fall in margins through  and , but these data were subject to considerable uncertainty.##NewPara##CPI inflation had risen to .% in October, which was a little higher than expected. On the basis of these data, it seemed likely that the short-term outlook for inflation would be a little higher than expected at the time of the November Inflation Report. In line with pre-release arrangements, an advance estimate of CPI inflation in November had been provided to the Governor   days ahead of publication, and this suggested a rise in the rate to .%. This was higher than the Committee s expectations based on the October data. However, CPI inflation had been at .% in June, before falling to .% in September, and movements of this magnitude over a few months were by no means unusual.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The central projection in the November Inflation Report had been for inflation to pick up in , reflecting the pressure of demand on supply and higher input and energy costs. Inflation was then expected to rise more slowly, reaching the % target after two years, and continuing to rise a little thereafter. The Committee reviewed the latest data in the light of the November Inflation Report projections and the associated risks.##NewPara##The US economy had turned out broadly in line with what had been expected then. But the data and surveys for the euro area and Japan looked rather weaker than had been expected. Members thought that there was now a greater risk of weaker world activity than had been incorporated in the November central projection, despite the sharp fall in oil prices from their recent peak. On domestic activity, there had been further signs of weakness in manufacturing and further strength in services. But, on balance, Committee members still thought that the latest indicators were consistent with a pickup in GDP growth to close to trend in Q. House prices seemed to be moving in line with the central projection. There were few signs, so far, of the slowing housing market leading to a sharp slowdown in consumption growth. But short-term measures of money and credit were growing more slowly.##NewPara##There was little news on pay pressures   which remained subdued   or on the degree of tightness in the labour market. Inflationary pressures continued to build in the supply chain, imported manufactures prices were starting to rise and headline producer prices were increasing at the fastest rate for nearly a decade. There had been a higher-than-expected outturn for CPI inflation in October and the pre-release data suggested a further pickup in November, although these data were volatile from month to month. But the appreciation of sterling on the month could help ease price pressures.##NewPara##Overall, the news on the month was mixed. The latest data and surveys suggested that the near- term outlook for domestic activity was broadly as had been expected, as were developments in the labour market. But world activity and oil prices had looked rather weaker than expected, while supply-chain price pressures had continued to increase. Market expectations for the path of interest rates over the next year or so had fallen a little further, on top of a substantial fall since the summer.##NewPara##The sterling effective exchange rate had risen. Members gave different weights to the various risks identified at the time of the November Report, and to developments on the month. For some members, the news was balanced and no change in interest rates was appropriate. For others, the downside risks to the inflation projection had increased, but not enough to make a persuasive case for a reduction in interest rates. All members concluded that no change in the repo rate was appropriate this month.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.