The world economy##NewPara##Developments in the United States over the month presented a contrasting picture. Amongst forward-looking indicators, while most forecasts of output growth over the next year or so had been revised down, the equity market had recovered somewhat and medium-to-long maturity bond yields had risen. The backward-looking data were also mixed. Output growth in Q had, at .% on Q, been stronger than expected, supported in particular by robust household spending. There had been a big negative contribution from stocks, as the corporate sector rapidly adjusted to the changing outlook. This probably helped to explain the fall in import growth, and thus the larger-than-expected contribution to quarterly output growth from net trade. There were suggestions that the inventory adjustment was more advanced in parts of the  old economy  than in the information and communications technology (ICT) sector and capacity utilisation appeared still to be falling, so that there might be significant adjustment##NewPara##to come in the economy as a whole.##NewPara##There was also now more evidence of weakness in investment. While total investment had held up reasonably well in Q, there had been a sharp fall in investment in ICT   the principal driver of the investment boom of the past few years. The other major news had been the substantial fall in employment in March. Employment (as measured by non-farm payrolls) had fallen in services as well as manufacturing, and temporary employment had dropped sharply. It was possible that, having for a while held on to labour against the prospect of a rapid recovery, US firms were now expecting   and preparing for   a more protracted slowdown. Developments in labour market conditions would be important, via effects on incomes and consumer confidence, for the path of household spending, and in##NewPara##particular would affect whether households saved more in order to strengthen balance sheets after several years of heavy borrowing.##NewPara##The Committee debated the outlook for the US economy against this background. Some members were pessimistic about investment. A number of outside forecasters believed that there was an investment overhang and so material spare capacity in the economy. While ICT equipment was depreciated rapidly in company accounts, the equipment and software would not in fact necessarily become obsolete and so would not have to be replaced so quickly, unless suppliers developed new applications which users considered essential. Orders for durable goods had fallen sharply in recent months, and this was likely to be a leading indicator of weak investment. Although the recent rise in the equity market was not easy to square with GDP forecasts being lowered, the equity market had been highly volatile and not much weight should be placed on its recent movements.##NewPara##For some other members, the outlook could be characterised as bi-modal. On the one hand, against a background of continued aggressive monetary policy easing by the Federal Reserve, credit conditions had eased since the early part of the year and equity markets had recovered somewhat since the Committee s April meeting, although they were still lower than at the time of the February Inflation Report. A plan for tax cuts had now been agreed by Congress. For the United States as a whole, the housing market apparently remained healthy; perhaps unusually, house prices had been steady or rising notwithstanding the fall in equity market prices over the past year or so. That would tend to support consumption. Developments in the labour market and corporate sector failures were not obviously out of line with what would be expected if there were a cyclical slowdown in growth. On the other hand, the underlying imbalances   reflected in high aggregate household indebtedness, parts of the corporate sector being highly geared, and the sizable external indebtedness which was the counterpart to cumulative current account deficits   could seriously impede recovery and prolong the cyclical downturn. But that was still not the most likely scenario.##NewPara##Related to this, expectations of the medium-to-long-term outlook for productivity growth were crucial. The recovery in the equity market over the past month might be reflecting relative optimism on that front. The data for Q showed a fall in productivity growth, but that was typical in a cyclical slowdown and so did not provide evidence either way about the underlying trend. In support of a positive medium-term outlook, some commentators and academic work had suggested that the benefits##NewPara##of the new technology were still spreading through the economy and that, in consequence, there remained substantial scope for further productivity gains. There was scientific evidence that the rate of technical progress in ICT could remain rapid, which was important since falling prices for semiconductors and other key technological building blocks had driven the ICT investment boom.##NewPara##Overall the Committee concluded that the outlook for the United States had, on balance, weakened over the past month. It was clearly weaker than at the time of the February Inflation Report, and the risks were on the downside. There were various views amongst members about the most likely prospect and the probability of the downside risks crystallising.##NewPara##It was unlikely that growth would pick up elsewhere in the world sufficiently to offset the effect of the US slowdown on the world economic outlook. In fact, growth in the euro area seemed to be moderating. For example, business confidence had weakened and the Purchasing Managers Index had fallen below  in April. The picture varied, however, across the single currency area: in particular, Germany was slowing while France remained relatively strong.  There had been sizeable tax cuts in both countries, which would help to support consumption. Household confidence remained high in the euro area as a whole. There had not been good economic news about Japan over the past month, and prospects there were weak. The problem of how to stimulate Japanese consumer demand remained, and it was not yet clear whether structural reform would help or hinder that in the short-to-medium term, even though it was important in the longer term. Both Japan and various emerging market economies in Asia were being adversely affected by the global shock to ICT demand.##NewTopic##Money and credit##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, narrow money growth had fallen slightly in April, but the level of cash and demand-deposit money holdings relative to economic activity remained a puzzle, given that much of the adjustment in households  money holdings to a low inflation environment should already have occurred.##NewPara##More significantly, although the twelve-month growth rates of broad money and lending had fallen slightly over the most recent month (March), they remained quite high at around  % and % respectively. Household M and M lending growth were around  % and  %. Taken together with the rise in the twelve month growth rate of Divisia money between  Q and  Q, the##NewPara##household money and credit data were consistent with a robust outlook for consumption growth and the housing market.##NewPara##The picture for the non-financial corporate sector was less clear.  Deposit growth had fallen in recent months   most noticeably as measured by the three-month and six-month annualised rates of growth   after rising rapidly during most of . On the lending side, there seemed to be contrasts between sectors. The manufacturing sector had made net repayments to the banking sector in  Q and again in  Q, while lending to the services sector had remained robust and lending to the real estate and construction sectors had been rising rapidly. Recent regular discussions with the banks suggested that there had so far been little distress borrowing, although they were monitoring the position in the light of the economic slowdown and the foot and mouth epidemic. Competitive conditions in the market for lending to medium-sized corporates were said to be intense.##NewPara##The FTSE All-Share equity index had risen by around % since the Committee s April meeting, compared with a rise of about % in the US Wilshire index; these indices were respectively about % and % below their levels at the time of the February Inflation Report. The sterling Exchange Rate Index was up about .% on the month.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The data on demand and output in  Q and  Q were hard to interpret. Current data suggested that output growth in Q had been much lower than final domestic demand growth. In order to help balance the National Accounts, the ONS had employed their standard approach of making an adjustment to the data on inventories, which are relatively poorly measured. As a result, the ONS effectively assumed substantial destocking in Q, but that did not square well with the survey evidence, and it would be odd if a major correction to inventories had occurred in the United Kingdom a quarter before the United States. Overall, as more information became available, revisions to the other components of demand or to output could not be ruled out. The provisional estimate for the quarter-on- quarter growth rate in Q had, at .%, also been lower than expected. Expenditure data were not yet available, but both retail sales and new private car registrations had been strong. This implied robust consumption growth, but it was also possible that spending in shops was substituting for spending in other areas, such as leisure services, curtailed by transport disruptions and the restrictions to stop the##NewPara##spread of foot and mouth disease. It was likely that strong consumption would partly be reconciled with slower output growth by a significant negative contribution from net trade, reflecting weaker demand in the United States, lower global demand for ICT goods, higher imports of cars, and the continuing strength of sterling s exchange rate. But it was too early to be confident about that. There had been a variety of special factors in the past two quarters, which would distort the data: retail transport problems, bad weather and floods, and more recently the foot and mouth epidemic. In each case these would have had some effect on supply as well as demand conditions, so slower output growth would not necessarily have translated fully into reduced pressure on the economy s productive capacity.##NewPara##Alternatively, it was possible that the Q output data were signalling weaker underlying demand. Whereas Q output growth outside the energy sector had been significantly higher than the aggregate number, that was not so for Q; and the global demand slowdown had become more pronounced during the quarter.##NewPara##Looking forward, the latest surveys, although mixed, were generally consistent with slowing growth. The April Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) surveys for both manufacturing and services had been significantly weaker. The CBI Quarterly Industrial Trends measure of optimism had fallen, although a less gloomy picture was presented by responses to other questions in the survey. The British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) survey for Q was less weak than the CBI and CIPS surveys, but it had been compiled earlier. Construction orders were buoyant according to the CIPS survey. On the household side, while consumer confidence was weak as measured by MORI, it was steady according to GfK, to which Committee members tended to give more weight. It was suggested that more weight should be placed on the business confidence measures than on the consumer confidence measures as forward-looking indicators, because household spending would react more quickly to the factors affecting confidence whereas, by contrast, there would be delay between changes in business confidence and the consequent changes to investment and other business spending.##NewPara##It was difficult to detect an obvious effect from the foot and mouth outbreak in most surveys, but the sharp falls in the CIPS services indicators were most marked in the hotels and leisure sectors, which were likely to be indirectly affected by foot and mouth. The Bank s regional Agents had reported a material adverse impact on the tourism and leisure industries in the affected areas, as well as on agriculture. It was too soon to form a view on the overall economic effects of the epidemic, but they##NewPara##might persist into Q and Q if tourist bookings for the summer had been significantly diverted to other countries.##NewTopic##Labour market conditions##NewPara##On the Labour Force Survey (LFS) measure, employment had increased quite strongly in the three months to end-February, but taking the past six months together now seemed to be rising rather more slowly and broadly in line with the population of working age. Unemployment had fallen on both the LFS and, in March, claimant-count measures. The survey evidence on labour market conditions was mixed. While the BCC and Recruitment and Employment Confederation (REC) surveys might imply a small tightening, the CBI Industrial Trends survey pointed to an easing in the manufacturing sector and the CIPS services survey suggested a recent sharp slowing in employment growth in services. The Bank s regional Agents had reported some signs of easing in skill shortages.##NewPara##The sharp rise in earnings growth in February largely reflected some financial firms paying bonuses a month earlier than in , and so was probably erratic.  Regular pay growth had been at around % in the year to January, but this was probably affected by strong pay growth around the time of the millennium date change dropping out of the twelve-month data, and so might understate the underlying trend. The April REC survey had for the second month running reported a drop in the rate of increase in salaries earned by workers placed in permanent jobs by employment agencies. The Bank s regional Agents were seeing few upward pressures on pay.##NewPara##Overall, it seemed that labour market conditions were stable, and might perhaps be set to ease slightly as the economy slowed.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Having ticked up for a period as the effects of sterling s earlier appreciation wore off and as oil prices rose, manufacturing input price inflation had fallen back in March, to under % on the twelve-month measure, the lowest rate for two years. Output price inflation was subdued. RPIX##NewPara##inflation had been a touch below % in March, and was expected to remain around that level in April.##NewPara##Over the past year or so, there had been a narrowing in the divergence between goods inflation and services inflation, as measured by RPIY as well as RPIX, which had opened up from  as a consequence of sterling s appreciation. In particular, services inflation had fallen from around  % in early  to just under % in March. It was suggested that this would be consistent with continuing pressure on margins; some members noted that the recent Euler survey had suggested that competitive pressures were more intense than at any time since the survey began in . Goods inflation, which was still slightly negative on the RPIY measure, would prospectively be kept low by a slowing world economy.##NewTopic##The May GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee took its policy decision in the light of the preparation of the projections to be published in the Inflation Report on Wednesday  May.##NewPara##On the assumption of an official repo rate of .% over the next two years, the central projection would be for RPIX inflation to be clearly below the target throughout the forecast period. On an alternative assumption of an official repo rate of .% over the next two years, the central projection was for GDP growth to be at or a little below trend for most of the forecast period   a slightly lower path than in the Committee s February projection, due to a weaker world economic outlook and slower growth in domestic consumption. The central projection for RPIX inflation, assuming a .% repo rate, was for it to remain around, or a little below, % during  and then to rise towards the  % target by the end of the two-year forecast horizon. For growth, the balance of risks in the published fan charts was on the downside in the first year of the projection, and for inflation it was on the downside throughout the forecast period, in both cases mainly on account of the clear downside risks to the US outlook over the coming year or so. The Committee emphasised the uncertainty around its projections.##NewPara##Some members had different views of the most likely outlook for inflation, reflecting different assumptions about the path of the international economic slowdown and the sensitivity of UK inflation to international influences and about the UK economy s supply-side performance. The main differences were recorded in Table .B of the Inflation Report. In combination, these alternative assumptions could reduce the inflation profile at the two-year forecast horizon by up to   percentage point.##NewTopic##Possible tactical considerations##NewPara##The clear majority expectation in the financial markets was for a  basis point cut in the Bank s repo rate, with a small probability ascribed to a  basis point cut.##NewPara##The Committee noted that the timing of the general election was irrelevant to its decisions, which would as usual be made on the basis of what was judged necessary to achieve the  % target for RPIX inflation over the medium term.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##For most members, the most likely outlook for output growth and inflation was as published in the Inflation Report fan charts. There was uncertainty about how best to interpret the recent weak UK output numbers given the apparent robustness of final domestic demand and the various temporary factors affecting activity in Q and Q. Output growth was, nevertheless, likely to be at or below trend for a while given the slowdown in the world economy. Business confidence had most probably fallen but the scale of that fall was as yet unclear. Slowing consumption growth and an increasing negative contribution to GDP growth from net trade were expected more than to offset the effects of rising public spending. The labour market was still quite tight but was no longer obviously tightening, and underlying pay pressures appeared stable. Price and cost pressures remained subdued. For these members, the news on the month was on balance in the direction of weaker growth and so warranted a further small cut in the Bank s repo rate. For some of these members, not much, if any, downside news had been needed since the Committee s April meeting to justify a further easing. Various arguments were identified for not cutting by more than  basis points, to which members gave various weights. First, recent data on retail sales, car registrations, the housing market, and household money and credit growth pointed to consumption growth remaining fairly strong, albeit slowing. Clearer evidence of its slowing would be needed to justify a larger cut in interest rates. Second, a cut of  basis points would run a material risk of being misinterpreted as implying that the Committee thought the prospect was bleaker than was in fact the case, and so could perversely damage confidence. Third, since there had been relatively little domestic news on the month and the implications for the United Kingdom of the international news were not clear, the better course was to move in small steps, cutting again if either domestic or international news were to justify that in due course. Fourth, while a large cut would be##NewPara##warranted if RPIX inflation were  stuck  at around %, there were not compelling reasons to believe that it was. Inflation outturns of around % should, in fact, be regarded as close to the  % target, given the unavoidable margins of error in setting policy produced by the lags in the transmission mechanism and the incidence of shocks. With the economy set to grow at or close to trend, a labour market which was still tight, and the earlier dampening effects on inflation of sterling s appreciation wearing off, inflation was most likely to rise gradually over the coming two years or so. It was not, therefore, necessary or prudent to cut by more than  basis points now.##NewPara##In varying degrees, these members emphasised risks to the outlook. A deeper or more prolonged- than-expected downturn in the United States, perhaps triggered by adjustment in private sector balance sheets, could trigger a further deterioration in UK net trade, potentially creating serious problems for the tradeables sector and leading to lower-than-projected inflation outturns. So far, asset prices, and in particular the recent recovery in equities, provided some comfort on that front. A second risk stemmed from imbalances in the UK economy. Domestic demand was set to continue growing materially faster than the rate of growth of the economy s supply capacity, having already done so for four years; indeed, the reduction in interest rates in April and a further cut now were designed to support domestic demand growth given the prospective increasing negative contribution to GDP growth from net trade as the world economy slowed.  This created a risk that the resulting current account deficits would trigger a sharp depreciation in sterling s exchange rate, causing inflation to rise by more than projected. The##NewPara##Consensus projections for the sterling Exchange Rate Index showed a steeper depreciation than assumed in the Committee s central projection. But a sharp depreciation was far from certain; in some circumstances an economy could run current account deficits indefinitely, although they could not widen indefinitely. In respect of both of these risks, these members concluded that such  worst case  scenarios should not affect policy now; the Committee could react to them if they were to crystallise in the light of economic conditions more generally at the time. On the basis of the current outlook, a  basis point reduction was the best immediate course.##NewPara##For some other members, the most likely outlook for output growth and inflation was, in varying degrees, somewhat weaker than reflected in the published fan charts and the downside risks somewhat greater.##NewPara##On one such view, a  basis point reduction had been needed in April, so no further news had been required to warrant a  basis point cut in the repo rate this month. In fact, the news on the month had been mostly on the downside, so there was a real question of whether there should be an immediate cut of  basis points. Domestically, while the Q and Q output numbers might be revised upwards, that was not the most likely prospect; and the fall in business confidence pointed to a slowing economy. External demand was weakening, and world price inflation was falling. On the basis of estimates of the neutral real interest rate, policy remained contractionary; and it was striking that, on current inflation outturns, the United Kingdom now had the highest real short-term interest rates in the G. The level of UK rates needed to be lower to reach the inflation target in the medium term. But there was a difficult and important question about timing. Three arguments pointed to making an immediate cut of only  basis points, with a clear prospect of further cuts later. First, a series of small cuts would have greater announcement effects and so would be more effective in supporting household confidence, when that became necessary, than a single large cut. Second, there was considerable uncertainty about the international outlook, and it would be useful to wait to see how the slowdown in the United States and elsewhere developed. Third, as the market was still learning about how the Committee reacted to news, it was preferable to keep to the Committee s recent practice of small changes in the repo rate rather than aggressive moves that might have to be followed by quick reversals. The gradualist approach the Committee had been adopting made it easier to explain policy and so influence behaviour in the economy.##NewPara##On another view, the published central projection for RPIX inflation was about   percentage point too high. This was for four main reasons. First, the outlook for both the United States and the euro area was weaker than assumed. Second, against a background of a protracted US downturn and the global shock to ICT demand, business investment would be weaker than projected. Third, the supply capacity of the economy was greater and the sustainable rate of unemployment was lower than had been built into the projection, perhaps because of a mismeasurement of capital. Fourth, the recovery in profit margins embodied in the projections was implausible given the direct survey evidence, falling capacity utilisation and the likely fall in the world inflation rate. Since the Committee s April meeting, the news had been clearly on the downside. Domestically, there had been a marked deterioration in the forward- looking surveys, which implied that output growth would again be weak in Q; and while consumption remained strong, it was to be expected that the slowdown would be seen first in the corporate sector and so in investment, with consumption slowing later. Internationally, the German data pointed to a further##NewPara##slowdown, and forecasts for the euro area were already being revised down. The US data were more mixed, but the most likely prospect was now clearly for an extended  U -shaped path for growth, as firms were shedding labour   itself a sign that they were giving up on a more rapid  V -shaped recovery##NewPara##  which would dent household confidence and spending. The equity price rise over the previous month was positive news, but the market was still well below the levels prevailing at the time of the February Inflation Report, and it had recently been too volatile for the recovery to be given much weight.##NewPara##Additional downside news over the month was not needed to justify a cut in the Bank s repo rate, as it needed to be lower in order to prevent a persistent undershooting of the  % inflation target. The question was how quickly to move. Since the gradualist approach of cuts of  basis points had not prevented a significant fall in business confidence, a bolder approach of an immediate cut of  basis points was warranted.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be reduced by  basis points to .%. Eight members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, David Clementi, Christopher Allsopp, Charles Bean, DeAnne Julius, Stephen Nickell and Ian Plenderleith) voted for the proposition. Sushil Wadhwani voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.