The world economy##NewPara##Overall the recent US economic data had been mixed. It now seemed likely that growth in  Q had been weaker than the Committee had assumed in May. The Consensus survey suggested that expectations for growth in  and  were slightly lower than the Committee had projected at that time, but the tone of the recent market and official commentary had been more positive. The key issue remained whether investment would recover before consumption eventually slowed.##NewPara##US consumption continued to grow steadily, and consumer confidence was stable. Although the rise in long yields, and consequently in fixed-rate mortgage rates, over the past month would tend to reduce the recent support to consumption growth from mortgage refinancing and equity withdrawal, there was still a stock of outstanding mortgages which could be refinanced at lower rates. House price increases had slowed a little, to an annualised rate of about % in the first quarter of , but the historically high level of house prices relative to income would still facilitate secured borrowing for consumption. And the recovery in equity prices since March was likely to be an important influence. Labour market weakness represented a risk to consumption, but there were mixed signals from the latest data. Unemployment had risen to .% in June, from .% in May, according to the household survey measure, reflecting a rise of over , in the labour force, of whom around , had found jobs. That increase in employment was not, however, reflected in non-farm payrolls, which fell  in June, according to the survey of firms. The rise in the labour force was a positive development to##NewPara##the extent that potential workers were returning to the labour force in anticipation of an upturn.##NewPara##Investment had been flat in Q, although there had been an increase in investment in information, communications and technology (ICT) goods. The outlook would be influenced by the prospects for demand and pressure on capacity. Manufacturing output growth had been weak in May, and new orders were flat. But there were some more positive indicators: the Institute for Supply Management s Purchasing Managers Index (PMI) for manufacturing had shown a rise in June, and there had been a sharp jump in the non-manufacturing PMI. Although export growth remained sluggish, the manufacturing PMI suggested that it might soon pick up, probably helped by the weaker dollar. A recovery in investment would be facilitated by the improvement in corporate balance sheets. Many firms had been able to extend the maturity of outstanding debt; and corporate liquidity had improved. It was possible, however, that major companies in the United States would be cautious about new investment for some time to come, in the aftermath of a number of corporate scandals and the ensuing legislation.##NewPara##Prospects for the US economy were also affected by the strong policy stimulus already enacted or planned. Some tax credit payments resulting from the recently agreed package would be paid in July, and there was evidence of some pick-up in government spending in  Q. The June FOMC meeting had made a further reduction in the Fed funds target rate, by . percentage points to %. In addition, the dollar had fallen sharply over the past twelve months. The full impact of all these developments had still to be felt, but the Committee noted that most of the fall in interest rates had taken place in . Moreover, the economy had faced significant negative shocks. It was therefore possible that the mildness of the recent downturn could be attributed to the support to activity already provided by fiscal and monetary policy.##NewPara##In the euro area, it now seemed that growth in  would be weaker than the Committee had projected in May, and recent Consensus forecasts had been revised downwards. There had been negligible GDP growth in Q, with investment falling and net trade making a negative contribution, and it seemed unlikely that any significant pick-up would be recorded in Q. The  basis point cut in the ECB s policy rate in June, which would support activity, had already been largely priced into market interest rates at the time of the Committee s June meeting.##NewPara##Euro-area industrial production had risen in April, but by less than it had fallen in March, and the PMIs for both manufacturing and non-manufacturing were below  in June. Consumption growth had been stronger than expected in Q, but it appeared that the strength might be transitory, reflecting high energy consumption during an unseasonably cold winter. Retail sales had been strong in April, but this followed weaker sales in March; it was possible that the monthly profile had been affected by the timing of Easter. Euro-area consumer confidence had risen slightly in June but remained subdued. Unemployment had been unchanged in May. German unemployment had fallen in June, but this appeared to have been associated with a rise in inactivity rather than a rise in employment, so it was not clear that this would tend to support confidence. A fiscal package had been outlined in Germany containing expenditure cuts amounting to around .% of GDP and bringing forward to  broadly similar tax cuts, although the impact of that package was still unclear.##NewPara##There had been some more hopeful indicators from Japan. Industrial production had risen by .% in May, and the latest Tankan survey of business conditions for large manufacturing firms had been stronger than expected, albeit still weak. There were some signs of structural improvement, as well as more resilient short-term economic data, and the recent rises in equity prices and government bond yields would be consistent with market perceptions of an improved economic outlook. Industrial production and consumption had weakened in May in the Asian emerging market economies,##NewPara##probably reflecting a temporary impact from SARS. The economic data from China continued to be strong.##NewPara##In summary, the global economic recovery remained hesitant.  It was not clear to what extent this reflected a sequence of adverse shocks   such as the terrorist attacks in September , corporate accounting and governance problems in the United States in -, the war in Iraq, and the SARS outbreak   or to what extent there was more deep-seated weakness following the rapid investment growth of the late s.  A key issue was whether investment in the United States would pick up  before consumption eventually slowed. The rise in equity prices and fall in government bond yields in recent months would tend to support the recovery, but the balance of economic data had been weaker##NewPara##than expected, especially in the euro area, which was of particular importance for the United Kingdom. There had been a substantial monetary policy stimulus in the United States and, to a lesser extent, in the euro area; in the former, this had been supplemented by fiscal easing. But it was not clear how rapidly and to what extent the stimulus would be reflected in stronger activity.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##During its June meeting, the Committee had discussed the difficulties in interpreting the combination of rising equity prices and the fall in government bond yields in the major industrial economies. In the past month, the puzzle had partially unwound. Government bond yields had risen in June   by more in the United States than in the United Kingdom and the euro area   while equity prices had changed relatively little. The catalyst for the adjustment in bond rates had been the reduction in the Fed funds target rate, which was smaller than the average expectation of market participants. They appear to have inferred that unconventional monetary policy measures aimed at countering the risk of deflation, such as purchases of long-dated government bonds by the Federal Reserve, were now less likely. The recent rise in government bond yields had been accompanied by a further fall in credit spreads in most major markets; together with the generally small changes in equity prices over the month, this suggested that a fall in risk premia had tended to offset the rise in risk-free interest rates. Broad money continued to grow rapidly in both the United States and the euro area. It had not so far been associated with robust recovery, possibly because risk averse investors preferred to hold more of their assets in liquid form.##NewPara##Sterling had appreciated against all major currencies in June. The effective exchange rate was now over % higher than at the time of the June MPC meeting, despite a fall of around % over the previous few days, and some  % higher than embodied in the May Inflation Report projections. This represented a partial unwinding of the depreciation since the beginning of the year. The Committee considered how it should take account of the recent changes in sterling.  The outlook for inflation could be materially affected by changes in the exchange rate, but the impact would depend on the extent to which these changes were temporary or persistent. Changes in the pattern of interest differentials over the latest month as a whole did not account for sterling s rise. There was no clear evidence that perceptions of UK economic prospects relative to those in other major economies had improved in the latest month. And HM Treasury s assessment of the case for adopting the euro did not appear to have had anything other than a temporary impact.##NewPara##The flow of secured lending to individuals, at  . billion in May, had been a little below its average in recent quarters, but still represented a strong rate of increase in the outstanding stock. Mortgage equity withdrawal was estimated to have been .% of personal disposable income in  Q, which represented a further increase over the high levels in . However, over the past two##NewPara##decades, both the owner occupancy rate and the ratio of house prices to earnings had increased significantly. It was important to be aware that, if these increases were sustained, borrowing secured on houses could be expected to grow relatively robustly for some time to come, as the existing housing stock was gradually sold to new entrants to the market who would need to borrow more to buy the properties than those who had originally bought them. The rate of unsecured borrowing by households was also still high, although the overall annual rate of increase of household borrowing from banks and building societies had probably passed its peak.##NewPara##Although the rate of increase in house prices was slowing, this slowdown was less rapid than had been expected at the time of the May Inflation Report. Averaging the Halifax and Nationwide indices, house prices were over % higher in  Q than in Q, and a preview of the June survey by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors showed a much smaller negative balance for house price expectations than in May.  However, housing market activity was continuing to weaken;  the number of housing loan approvals and particulars delivered both declined in May, the latter to a seven-year low.##NewPara##The rate of increase in corporates  total external finance, taking April and May together, had been slightly less than in  Q, but corporates  borrowing from banks had been strong in May. Both total external finance and bank borrowing were subject to short-term volatility due to mergers and acquisitions.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The new estimate for GDP in  Q had resulted in a downward revision of growth on the quarter from .% to .%, although revisions to data for earlier quarters meant that there was little change in the estimated level of GDP. Estimates of both manufacturing and services growth had been revised upwards but the estimate for construction showed a steep fall, which appeared to reflect private non-residential construction in particular. The extent of the estimated weakness of the construction sector was difficult to reconcile with some other available information: business surveys suggested construction growth had remained strong;  employment in construction had risen in Q;  and the Bank s regional Agents had not seen evidence of a steep decline in construction activity, although their contacts had reported a reduction in the growth rate. More generally, the Committee noted that early##NewPara##estimates of GDP growth for previous quarters had often been revised significantly.##NewPara##There had recently been some relatively positive indicators for activity in Q. The CIPS services survey for June had shown further increases in the activity and new orders balances. The Agents had suggested that manufacturing had passed its cyclical trough; output had shown only a modest fall in  May, and the CIPS survey had edged over  in June. It was reasonable to expect some recovery in construction after the fall in activity in Q. However, the continuation of unseasonably warm weather into Q meant that the recovery in energy output might be delayed until at least Q. Overall, output was likely to have grown by a little less in Q than envisaged in the May Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##The assessment of the growth of demand in recent quarters was complicated by major revisions to the trade data. The previous estimates for exports in  Q and  Q had been surprisingly low. The data for  Q had been revised up significantly in the Q National Accounts, although data for  Q had not been revised. It was difficult to interpret recent month-to-month movements in the export data, but the latest survey evidence did not suggest a robust recovery.##NewPara##Revisions to the import data back to , to allow for the effects of VAT-related fraud, had been striking. The Committee noted the ONS s view that these revisions would not materially change the estimates of the level of output, but the pattern of demand would be substantially affected. The contrast between strong domestic demand and weak net trade now appeared to be larger than previously thought. The market reaction to the revisions had so far been modest, but the less favourable current account position might imply a potential downside risk to sterling. The revisions to the import data would help to reduce, but would not eliminate, the discrepancy between UK and Eurostat estimates of bilateral trade flows between the United Kingdom and the rest of the European Union. A considerable degree of uncertainty about these and possible further revisions, and their implications for the level of output and inflationary pressure, remained.##NewPara##Consumption growth was now estimated to have slowed sharply, to .% in  Q, which was lower than projected in the May Inflation Report. Growth in the second quarter was likely to be stronger than in those projections. However,  consumer  spending  growth  was low relative  to the growth recorded in  Q. That may have reflected much weaker growth in real disposable income associated with moderate growth in earnings and the rise in the Tax and Prices Index. Nevertheless, growth in unsecured borrowing was still high, mortgage equity withdrawal was buoyant, fixed-rate##NewPara##mortgage rates had continued to fall, house price inflation was still strong and was easing less quickly than expected, and the level of employment remained high, all of which would tend to support consumption going forward.##NewPara##Whole economy investment was estimated to have fallen by more than % in  Q. Within that, business investment was estimated to have been broadly unchanged and government investment to have increased strongly. The fall was driven in large part by housing investment, which had been surprisingly weak. There were some factors which would support investment going forward. One possible counterpart to the recent revisions to the current account might be weaker estimates of the financial position of the corporate sector, but corporate balance sheets had recently been improving and appeared well-positioned to accommodate higher levels of investment. Some surveys of business confidence suggested an improvement since March, following the war in Iraq, and the cost of capital had fallen in  Q, but surveys of investment intentions remained relatively weak.##NewTopic##The labour market, costs and prices##NewPara##The employment rate had been unchanged in the three months to April, although total hours worked had fallen by .%. The slight rises in unemployment since the low point earlier in the year, according to both the Labour Force Survey (LFS) and the claimant count, had attracted some attention. Yet these movements were small in an historical context.  The rise in the claimant count reflected a fall in outflows from unemployment, rather than the rise in inflows to unemployment which would have been expected had a shakeout of previously hoarded labour been in progress. Overall, the labour market quantity data were broadly in line with the May Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##Headline earnings growth had slowed by . percentage points in April, as regular pay growth eased. The gap between public and private sector pay growth had widened further. Growth in regular pay per hour was little changed in recent months;   the fall in average hours worked may have   accounted for some of the decline in growth in private sector regular pay. The rise in inflation over the past year and the increase in employees  National Insurance contributions had not yet had much effect on wage bargains, but they could have more impact during the next pay round. Given the planned increases in public expenditure, it was likely that public sector pay would continue to increase rapidly, and the Committee considered the likelihood that this would affect private sector pay growth. In the##NewPara##past, evidence suggested that causality tended to run in the opposite direction: rising private sector pay##NewPara##had often been followed by the public sector. But current behaviour could be different from the past, given changes in the structure of pay bargaining and stronger growth in public spending. The key factor would probably be the overall balance of demand and supply in the labour market.##NewPara##RPIX inflation had fallen to .% in May from .% in April. In line with pre-release arrangements, an advance estimate of the RPI was provided to the Governor   working days ahead of publication; this suggested a further fall in RPIX inflation in June to .%. The current rate of RPIX inflation was somewhat lower than had been envisaged earlier in the year. Annual inflation in goods had been negative at the end of , but was broadly flat in May, while services price inflation had eased from .% at the end of  to .%. Lower inflation in leisure services was a major influence.##NewPara##Information on inflationary pressures at an earlier stage of the supply chain was mixed; spot and future oil prices had increased a little further in the past month, while input prices had fallen in May. Import prices had continued to be very restrained, and might represent a downside risk to the May Inflation Report projections, which had envisaged a larger increase going forward; this would depend on the global balance of supply and demand and the behaviour of the exchange rate. Looking ahead, RPIX inflation might return to around the target rate of .% by the autumn.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The balance of market expectations was slightly against a repo rate reduction at the July meeting; for example, the latest Reuters poll showed economists attributing an average % probability to a no- change decision. But there was thought to be a high probability of a rate reduction in August if there were no change in July.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Recent global economic data had been disappointing, particularly when account was taken of the importance of the euro area to the demand for UK exports. Monetary and fiscal policy were providing a substantial economic stimulus in the United States and, to a lesser extent, the euro area, the full effect of which had still to be felt, but  adverse shocks and the investment overhang remaining from the s had inhibited recovery. A key issue was the strength of aggregate demand in the United Kingdom, where higher public spending had largely been offset by slower consumer demand and subdued private investment. The implications of the recent large revisions to the trade data for##NewPara##estimated UK output were not yet entirely clear. The overall pressure of demand on output capacity might not be greatly changed, but the imbalance between domestic demand and net trade had increased. The % rise in the exchange rate on the month had only partially reversed the depreciation since the beginning of the year, but if sustained would lower projections for activity and inflation, as would the rise in long-term interest rates. Private sector pay pressures were benign, but prospects going forward depended on whether this would persist or was simply a reflection of the weakness of activity; and public sector pay was growing strongly. Most recent news on RPIX inflation had been below earlier expectations, but house price increases were slowing by less than had been envisaged in the May Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##The Committee identified various arguments for an immediate repo rate reduction. First, there had been some material downside news since the May Inflation Report projections. Most notably, UK-weighted world activity was weaker than expected. Estimated GDP growth for  Q had also been revised down, although less significance than usual could be given to that because of the various data uncertainties. Growth in Q might also be slightly weaker than expected in May, with subdued##NewPara##consumption growth tending to offset the rise in public expenditure. Pay pressures and RPIX inflation had so far been lower than expected at that time. Second, the May Inflation Report projections had been consistent either with a repo rate reduction or with no change in rates. In deciding not to vote for a repo rate reduction at that time, some members had given weight to the sharp fall in sterling after the projections were finalised, and the possibility that the decline could go further. That fall had now been reversed. Third, some important elements in the balance of risks had shifted in favour of a reduction in rates. The short-term rise in RPIX inflation above the target did not seem to have caused any drift in inflation expectations away from the target. A repo rate reduction seemed unlikely to cause house prices to accelerate, given the current slowdown in housing activity. There was therefore less risk than earlier in the year of stimulating further increases in household borrowing and so exacerbating the imbalance between domestic demand and net trade.  And there was also less risk than there had been in February that a rate reduction would be read as an unexpectedly negative signal about the Committee s view of UK economic prospects. Finally, although waiting until August would allow a full assessment in the Inflation Report round, the uncertainties relating to the National Accounts data would not be resolved until the publication of new data in late September. Against this background, there was no real advantage to delaying the repo rate reduction for a further month.##NewPara##The Committee also identified various arguments for leaving interest rates unchanged this month. First, there were some positive indications in recent economic data. In particular, the outlook for consumption might be somewhat stronger than envisaged in the May Inflation Report projections, and the strength of house prices, equity prices and household borrowing would work to offset the squeeze on post-tax incomes. The cost of equity finance, and   for many companies   debt finance, had fallen since the May Inflation Report. Some of the downside risks to activity had diminished: corporate cash flows had improved, and a sharp fall in house prices now looked somewhat less likely.  On one view, therefore, the domestic economic outlook had not weakened materially since May, while the medium-term prospect remained one in which output growth was close to its trend rate. Second, cumulatively there had been a substantial easing in the stance of macroeconomic policy over the past two years, including the latest  basis point repo rate cut by the ECB in June, the tax cuts and the fiscal loosening in the United States, and the recent  basis point reduction in the Fed funds target rate. The current policy stance was strongly expansionary by historical standards, and the impact on demand of an easing on this scale was difficult to predict. This posed an upside risk to the US and euro-area outlook relative to the May Inflation Report projections. Third, a repo rate reduction now would involve some further risks. There were upside risks to public sector pay, as public spending increased, which might spill over to the private sector. The revisions to the trade data had worsened the estimated imbalance between domestic and external demand, and that may have increased the risk of a downward adjustment to sterling. And a particular cause of concern for some members was that the rate of growth of secured and unsecured borrowing by households was still unsustainably high, and might be exacerbated by a repo rate reduction. The UK monetary policy stance was already stimulatory, since real short-term interest rates were well below their likely long-term average level, and the fiscal position had swung towards expansion. A further reduction would probably also bring forward the time at which a rise in rates would be necessary. Finally, there was a case for a fuller assessment of the latest data in the context of the August Inflation Report round. Such a delay would have the added advantage of discouraging market participants from mistakenly interpreting an immediate repo rate reduction as a mechanical response to short-term movements in the exchange rate.##NewPara##There was a range of views among Committee members about the weights which it was appropriate to attach to these various arguments. On balance, some members felt that the evidence was clearly sufficient to warrant an immediate repo rate reduction; other members felt that the decision was more finely balanced, and the key consideration was the shift in the balance of risks, so that there would now be advantage in a precautionary rate reduction; while for one member, the##NewPara##central outlook was benign and the balance of risk lay in favour of making no change in interest rates now.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be reduced by  basis points to .%. Eight members of the Committee (the Governor, Andrew Large, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Marian Bell, Richard Lambert, Stephen Nickell and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. Rachel Lomax voted against, preferring to maintain the repo rate at .%.