The world economy##NewPara##In the United States, the estimate of GDP growth in the first quarter had been revised up a little, to .%, mainly on the basis of stronger consumption growth. There was further evidence of recovery from the temporary effects of the uncertainties associated with the military action in Iraq: both the manufacturing and the services ISM indices had improved in May, and by more than generally expected   albeit only to levels last seen at the turn of the year. Consumer confidence had also improved, though retail sales values had fallen back in April and weekly indicators suggested that sales might have been weak in May too. The labour market continued to soften, and survey measures indicated that jobs were still perceived to be hard to find. New orders for non-defence capital goods remained flat in April and the latest senior loan officer survey suggested that (other than for non- residential mortgages) demand for loans was weaker. Investment intentions, as reported in the semi- annual ISM surveys, had fallen back sharply in manufacturing, though they were a little stronger in services. But policy remained stimulative: the agreed fiscal package, which included substantial tax cuts, would have rather stronger early effects than previously envisaged, and there was some market expectation that many of the tax measures would be allowed to remain in force; in their latest statement, the FOMC had emphasised their determination to act to avoid deflation; and longer-term interest rates had again fallen substantially, encouraging further mortgage refinancing. In addition, the weaker dollar should improve the net trade position. Overall, the medium-term prospect in the United States remained one of continued recovery, in line with the May Inflation Report projection.##NewPara##In the euro area, by contrast, GDP growth in the first quarter was estimated to have been a little weaker than expected at the time of the May Inflation Report. Within that overall picture, however,##NewPara##domestic demand had been somewhat stronger than expected and net trade correspondingly weaker   the latter probably reflecting the effects of the euro s appreciation towards the end of .##NewPara##It was unclear why euro-area consumption should have been stronger in the first quarter, and across a range of countries there. It seemed unlikely that this could be the result of the improvement in the terms of trade, as its effect on consumer prices was not yet sufficient to boost real personal disposable incomes to an extent which could explain the pick-up in consumption.  It was possible that it might prove to be erratic: data for April on retail sales (excluding motor vehicles) in Germany were less encouraging, and concerns about job prospects had further depressed consumer confidence in May. Business confidence had also fallen, demand for loans remained weak and credit conditions appeared set to tighten. However, the ECB now had more scope to reduce interest rates, and a cut of  basis points at their meeting on  June was widely expected. That would provide a stimulus to domestic demand. In Germany, the corporate sector s move towards financial surplus might signal better prospects for investment, though it was also possible that   as for US companies   businesses there needed to reduce their gearing and would run surpluses for a while as a result. Once that balance sheet adjustment was complete, investment would be more likely to revive.##NewPara##In Japan, GDP had been unchanged in the first quarter, rather weaker than had been reflected in the May Inflation Report, and the .% fall in the GDP deflator on a year earlier was the largest on record there. Growth had slowed elsewhere in Asia, though it remained robust in China. Those countries in the region with currencies pegged to the US dollar should, however, benefit from stronger net trade in the coming months.##NewPara##Overall, UK-weighted world GDP now seemed likely to have been a little weaker in the first quarter than had been envisaged in the May Inflation Report projections; on the other hand, UK- weighted world imports were now estimated to have grown more strongly than projected. Much of this increase was accounted for by imports into the euro area. However, the overall net trade position of the major industrial countries appeared to have been in deficit for the second quarter in succession and it was difficult fully to identify the counterpart surpluses. It was possible, therefore, that some of the deficits were not as large as was currently estimated.##NewPara##Oil prices had strengthened in the past month, as   to a lesser extent   had other commodity prices (though a substantial part of the latter s increase in dollar terms could be accounted for by the##NewPara##fall in the dollar exchange rate). It was noted that oil production in Iraq was not now expected to be fully restored as quickly as had earlier been thought, and that there had been suggestions of cuts to OPEC production quotas. So these price increases were not necessarily indicative of stronger world activity.##NewTopic##Financial markets, money and credit##NewPara##There had been little change in short-term interest rates except in the euro area, where three- month rates had fallen some  basis points. Medium and longer-term rates had, however, fallen by a similar amount in most major markets, including in the United Kingdom. That global shift perhaps reflected concerns about the risks of deflation, prompted   in the United States   by the interpretation put upon the recent FOMC statement and on Chairman Greenspan s testimony to Congress. It was, puzzlingly, associated primarily with lower expected real yields rather than with lower expected inflation. If markets expected central banks to be pre-emptive and successful in resisting deflation, short and medium-term, not longer-term, real rates should be lower; and if central banks were expected to fail to achieve that objective, then break-even inflation rates should have fallen. One possible interpretation, for the US market at least, was that the FOMC would indeed be successful in warding off deflation but that, in doing so, it would need to buy long bonds heavily and so would drive up their price. Another possible interpretation was that expectations of productivity growth in the United States had been marked down, although there had to date been relatively little evidence of a slowdown in US productivity growth, despite slower output growth.##NewPara##The euro continued to appreciate against the dollar. That could be linked to stronger-than- expected domestic demand in the euro area, but more likely was simply the unwinding of a previous misalignment. Sterling s recent movements relative to the dollar and the euro had, however, been less consistent than before. The main news on the month for sterling was that most of the % fall in its effective exchange rate, which had taken place between the finalisation of the May Inflation Report projections and the May policy meeting, had been sustained. Consensus forecasts suggested that sterling s effective rate would remain at around this new level.##NewPara##Equities had generally strengthened over the month, with the Wilshire up  % and the FTSE All-Share up %. The Euro Stoxx index was only % higher, though this represented an increase of##NewPara##just over  % in dollar terms and so was broadly comparable with other major markets on a common currency basis. The FTSE index was now some % above its low point in March.##NewPara##Money and credit indicators in the United Kingdom remained strong. The annual growth rate of notes and coin, adjusted for special factors, had increased in May, and was consistent with a pick-up in retail sales growth; and (in April) the twelve-month growth rate of household M money had also increased. The continuing strength of household deposit growth was perhaps a reflection of households  current risk aversion, illustrated by the further weakness in retail purchases of unit trusts. Household borrowing growth, however, had eased, with the slowing concentrated in unsecured borrowing. It was likely that secured borrowing growth would remain strong for a while, even after house prices had stabilised, as housing turnover would bring to the market new buyers who would need to borrow more   now that houses were more expensive   than the current owners had done.##NewPara##Corporate borrowing growth had picked up further in April, and the annual rate of decline in lending to the manufacturing sector had eased. This was consistent with a stabilisation in manufacturing investment. Corporate sterling bond issuance remained steady. It was, however, difficult to interpret these data in aggregate, as balance sheet restructuring and one-off transactions by large companies could disguise underlying trends. There was no strong evidence, from the external financing data, of any marked pick-up in investment demand.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##GDP in the first quarter was still estimated to have grown by just .%, as in the first release, with output in the services sector somewhat stronger than the provisional estimate. There had been a sharp fall in energy output, associated with the unseasonably mild weather, so that GDP growth excluding energy and agricultural output had been .%. Manufacturing output in the quarter was now a little weaker than originally estimated, and its profile through the quarter more closely matched the survey evidence. In contrast to the weak growth in the constant price measure based on output indicators, however, nominal GDP (which was estimated from the expenditure side) had grown quite strongly, by .%. That implied a surprisingly large increase in the GDP deflator, which could suggest that the current figure for real GDP growth in the first quarter might be an underestimate. So too did the fact that growth in the quarter was faster on the expenditure-based measure of real GDP.##NewPara##The Committee had projected a sharp recovery in growth in the second quarter. There was some supportive survey evidence for stronger growth, particularly in the services sector, though the pick-up now seemed likely to be somewhat more muted than was envisaged a month ago. Even so, growth in the second quarter should not be much below trend rates.##NewPara##The ONS estimate of final domestic demand in the first quarter was substantially below the figure included in the May Inflation Report. This shortfall was mainly accounted for by lower-than- expected aggregate investment, though the ONS estimate of business investment   the only component on which data were currently available   was somewhat stronger than expected. There were indications that housing investment had been particularly weak, and that the acquisition of valuables (a volatile component) had also detracted from investment growth. This possible weakness in housing investment might simply reflect the general uncertainties in the first quarter, and so could prove erratic.  Exports too were lower than expected, with no sign of a significant bounce-back from the weak fourth quarter outturn or of any stimulus yet from sterling s depreciation. Surveys suggested that export orders were still weak, and the Bank s regional Agents reported that the depreciation was being reflected in improvements in exporters  margins rather than in higher levels of business. But because imports too had been lower than expected, net trade overall was only a little below expectations.##NewPara##There were, however, considerable doubts about the reliability of these data in the past few years, so it was difficult to be confident about the underlying trends in imports and exports.##NewPara##Consumption growth in the first quarter had slowed sharply, in line with expectations. The May projection had been for a further slowing in the second quarter. Retail sales growth in April had, however, been quite strong and the CBI Distributive Trades survey suggested that this strength might have continued into May. Consumer confidence too had improved, though on the back of improved perceptions of the general outlook and of respondents  expected   rather than current   personal financial circumstances. It was noted that retail sales had been particularly weak in January and it was possible therefore that the first quarter outturn was artificially low. Growth of retail sales in the second quarter might, correspondingly, overstate the underlying pace of recovery. It seemed possible too that car sales in May could have been weak. House price inflation in May, as measured by the Nationwide and Halifax indices, was somewhat stronger than expected, though the three-month rates of increase continued to slow; the much weaker outturn for the first quarter shown by the ODPM index was hard to interpret. Looking forward, the price expectations in the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors survey had strengthened   though the balance remained negative. Activity indicators, however,##NewPara##remained weak and particulars delivered had fallen again in April. Overall, the prospect was of somewhat stronger than projected growth in consumption in the second quarter and for a continued steady easing in house price inflation: the immediate risk of an abrupt correction in house prices seemed to have diminished.##NewTopic##Wages, costs and prices##NewPara##Labour market quantities continued to present a stable picture, with employment still growing at a rate which kept pace with the growth of the working age population. Unemployment was little changed, and inflows to the claimant count were not increasing. Average and total hours had picked up a little, which would be consistent with stronger output growth in the first quarter than was currently reflected in the ONS estimates. But the data on hours worked were noisy and the increase could be the result of normal sampling error.##NewPara##Headline earnings growth had increased in March, contrary to expectations, largely as a result of a positive contribution of . percentage points from bonuses after a . percentage point negative contribution in February. The most plausible explanation of this sharp reversal was, however, that it was simply a timing effect, associated with the increase in National Insurance contributions in April: this might well have encouraged firms planning to pay bonuses in April to bring those payments forward by a month. The growth rate of pay excluding bonuses remained subdued. The gap between earnings growth in manufacturing and in services, with the former growing faster than the latter, had widened, and was consistent with a similar difference in pay settlements. Though at first sight puzzling, it might reflect a shift in the mix of employment in manufacturing towards higher skill occupations as low-skill jobs were lost. Private sector pay settlements had increased a little in April, but there were still no obvious signs of widespread compensation of employees for the increase in their National Insurance contributions or of settlements reflecting faster RPI inflation.##NewPara##RPIX inflation in April was .%, a little weaker than expected. A higher-than-expected contribution from air fares and other travel prices had been more than offset by smaller contributions from leisure services and fuel and light. The projected near-term hump in inflation might therefore be somewhat flatter than previously expected, though the recent increase in oil prices would counter that to some extent. There was, however, little news here for the medium-term inflation outlook and no sign yet, in either import or input prices, of any feed-through from sterling s depreciation. The##NewPara##Agents  special survey had highlighted the importance for firms  costs of increased insurance and regulatory costs; and had, as expected, indicated that cost increases were more likely to be passed through fully into price increases in services than in manufacturing. The survey had also indicated pessimism amongst manufacturers on profit expectations for domestic sales.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##There was particular uncertainty at the time of the previous meeting about whether the fall in sterling in the days immediately before the meeting would be maintained, reversed or indeed continue. So in terms of the May Inflation Report projections, the most significant news was probably that sterling s effective exchange rate was still about  % below that envisaged at the time those projections were finalised   that was equivalent to about a third of the fall that had taken place between the February and May forecasts. Interpreted mechanically, on the basis of the assumptions made in May, that further fall would add about .% to GDP and a little over . percentage points to inflation at the two-year horizon. The near-term outlook for activity was, however, a little softer, perhaps to the extent of . percentage points in the second quarter. That might offset some of the higher inflation due to the lower-than-expected level of the sterling exchange rate.##NewPara##Market expectations were now weighted two-thirds against a reduction in interest rates at this meeting. The Reuters survey of economists was weighted slightly towards a no change decision, on the view that there had been no clear news on the month that would alter the Committee s previous judgment.##NewPara##Finally, it was noted that the Government s assessment of the case for adopting the euro as the United Kingdom s currency would be published the following week. It was agreed that sterling s recent depreciation made it less likely than six months ago that this would have a marked impact on the exchange rate, whatever the conclusion of the assessment were to be.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##It was agreed that the net implications of the economic news in the past month were small, other than that sterling s depreciation in the days before the previous meeting had not been quickly reversed. The key issue remained whether the benign outcome embodied in the May Inflation Report projections##NewPara##would in fact be realised: would the recovery in external demand and the effects of sterling s depreciation indeed offset the expected slowing in domestic consumption growth, to leave the UK economy growing at close to trend and inflation close to target? The world economy was perhaps a little softer than it had appeared to be a month ago: while the US recovery was broadly on track, the euro area seemed weaker than projected. The ECB was, however, widely expected to reduce interest rates there. In the United Kingdom, consumption growth and house price inflation were perhaps slowing less rapidly than projected. Equities had continued to strengthen. Exports, however, had not bounced back as expected from the weak fourth quarter outturn and GDP growth in the second quarter seemed likely to fall short of expectations. As in the previous month, therefore, the policy decision was finely balanced and depended largely on judgments about the risks surrounding the projections.##NewPara##Various arguments continued to suggest to some members that a reduction in interest rates was appropriate now. First, the news on the world economy was if anything weighted to the downside, at least in terms of near-term prospects, and was consistent with a realisation of the downside risks to activity noted the previous month. In the United States, the labour market remained weak, consumer confidence in the current situation had fallen and it seemed likely that growth in the second quarter would fall short of expectations; in the euro area, the continued strengthening in the euro would further weaken the net trade position and the apparent strength of consumption in the first quarter seemed likely to prove erratic; and growth in Asia had slowed. Though the ECB was expected to reduce official interest rates in the euro area, it was not clear how much of this would be passed on in lower lending rates. Second, the short-term downside risks to output seemed to be crystalising in the United Kingdom too. In particular, there was no sign that exports were rebounding as expected, despite stronger imports into the euro area from the rest of the world, or that they were yet responding positively to sterling s now substantial depreciation. Though it remained likely that growth would return to trend, stimulated by increased government spending and by sterling s depreciation, it now seemed less likely to do so as quickly as envisaged in the May projections. Third, pay settlements and earnings growth remained consistent with a view that inflation expectations were well-anchored to the target. In those circumstances, pass-through from sterling s depreciation to UK inflation was likely   as envisaged in the May projections   to be muted. A boost to the economy was therefore warranted, to offset the current weakness in activity and to ensure that output returned quickly to trend, and it was not expected by these members to add materially to inflationary pressures further out. If aggregate demand were to recover rapidly, any reduction in interest rates could quickly be reversed.##NewPara##There were also various arguments for leaving interest rates unchanged this month, which most members on balance found decisive. First, sterling had remained below the level incorporated in the May projections for output and inflation. Because it had fallen to that level in the days immediately before the policy meeting, it had been unclear whether it was a temporary movement or would persist. Its subsequent stability at this lower level was therefore upside news for inflation over the medium term and inflation was already projected to be increasing at the two-year horizon. Second, domestic demand in the first quarter was stronger than expected, both in the euro area and in the United Kingdom, and a higher probability should now be attached to the risk that UK consumption growth would slow less rapidly in the coming quarters than had been projected. Third, some of the downside risks to the May projections seemed to have diminished. In the United States, for example, the outlook for the corporate sector and for investment had improved (though there remained risks to consumption there); and in the United Kingdom, the somewhat faster-than-expected pace of house price inflation suggested that, although it was clearly slowing, it was now less likely that there would be an abrupt price correction in the housing market. Fourth, though the latest data for the euro area had been disappointing, and the euro had continued to appreciate, there was the prospect of a reduction in euro interest rates by the ECB at its meeting on  June.  It would be sensible to review the projections for the euro area once the outcome of that meeting was known and reaction to it could be assessed, rather than respond to those weak data ahead of the ECB decision. Finally, there remained a concern about the vulnerability of households to adverse shocks, given the build-up of household debt in recent years. A reduction in interest rates risked adding unnecessarily to that vulnerability, by encouraging a rapid further accumulation of debt.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. Six members (the Governor, Mervyn King, Andrew Large, Charlie Bean, Richard Lambert and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. Three members (Kate Barker, Marian Bell and Steve Nickell) voted against, preferring a reduction of . percentage points.##NewPara##Finally, on the occasion of the Governor s last Committee meeting, the Treasury representative recorded the Treasury s and the Chancellor s appreciation of the success of the Monetary Policy Committee in achieving the objectives set for it, and of the quality of the working relationships between the Bank and the Treasury: both owed much to the Governor s personal contribution.##NewPara##Mr King, on behalf of members of the Committee past and present, recorded their admiration of the Governor s leadership and noted his success, in only a few years, in transforming what had begun as a##NewPara##bold experiment into an accepted and integral part of the United Kingdom s macroeconomic policy framework.