The Budget##NewPara##Prior to its previous meeting, the Committee had been briefed by Treasury officials on the broad shape of the Budget s macroeconomic projections and the prospects for the public finances. It had agreed that more analysis would be needed once the full details of the Budget were known.##NewPara##Since then the Budget had been finalised. The broad shape of the projections for the public finances was unchanged from the Committee s previous meeting. In / the net borrowing figure was nearly % of GDP lower than assumed in the November Pre-Budget Report (PBR), with the surplus now put at   billion as against   billion in November. The net borrowing figures in the Budget for the following two years were also lower than in the PBR, although the difference between the Budget and the PBR numbers was smaller than for /. By the third year (/) net borrowing was higher than in the PBR.##NewPara##The figures for real government consumption and investment over the next two years were higher in the Budget than the assumptions made in the February Inflation Report, but little different from those in the November Inflation Report. This principally reflected the conventions employed in the Committee s forecasts, not announcements in the Budget. Between November and February the government expenditure deflator had been revised up which, when projected forward, had implied lower public spending in real terms given the government s nominal spending plans. The higher nominal profile for public spending in the Budget would need to be reflected in the May##NewPara##Inflation Report, but the February Inflation Report had, in effect, already incorporated much of the recorded increase in tax revenue in /, and this had influenced the private sector consumption and investment estimates for /.##NewPara##There were, as always, uncertainties in the projections of future government revenue and spending, and in assessing the effects of the Budget more generally. The sustained real growth in public spending on goods and services meant that private spending would have to be constrained. However, spending by departments might increase more slowly than projected, as it had done recently, and tax revenues might continue to be above the levels projected by the Treasury, particularly if their past buoyancy reflected structural rather than cyclical factors. But since the reasons for higher tax revenues were not well understood, it was uncertain how far recent trends could safely be extrapolated into the future. It was noted, though, that the Treasury s Budget projections were prepared using what seemed to be prudent assumptions. All in all, most members of the Committee thought that the impact on future activity and inflation from the Budget seemed unlikely to be large over the next two years.##NewPara##The Committee then discussed the effect on the public finances of the spectrum auctions for the Third Generation mobile telephone licences. While the auction receipts would boost the government s cash flow straightaway, the immediate impact on the Public Sector Net Borrowing measure would be much less marked, since for these purposes the revenue would be accrued over the life of the licences, ie until December . On balance, even though the proceeds were likely to be substantially higher than initially expected the macroeconomic effect should not be large, unless any adjustment in taxes or government spending were brought forward rather than accrued over the life of the licences. More immediately, if foreign bidders bought rather than borrowed sterling to pay for the licences there could be a temporary effect on the exchange rate.##NewTopic##Money and asset prices##NewPara##M and M lending were both increasing at %-% a year, consistent with robust consumption growth. Loan approvals for house purchase had bounced back strongly in February, suggesting that the slowdown around the turn of the year had reflected seasonal effects.  Competition in the mortgage market remained intense. House price indicators in March were mixed, with the Halifax index declining while the Nationwide index had risen strongly. Data on site visits and net reservations from the House Builders  Federation pointed to a possible easing in activity later in the year, but it was too early to say whether house price increases would moderate to the extent projected in the February Inflation Report.##NewPara##Monetary and financial data, together with recent surveys, suggested a rather stronger outlook for business investment, with capital gearing (as measured by market values) falling as equity prices rose. The financial deficit of the private non-financial corporate sector in , however, was at its highest as a percentage of GDP for almost ten years, although there was little sign that this was holding back planned investment. Much of the deficit had been financed either by foreign currency borrowing or by sterling capital market issuance. Corporate bond spreads over gilts remained wide, perhaps reflecting relative supply, with heavy long-dated corporate bond issuance over the last year.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the implications of the recent movements in global equity prices for the economic outlook. While so-called  new economy  shares had fallen significantly in price over the month, with the NASDAQ index in the US down around %, this had not had a contagious effect on other sectors, and  old economy  share prices showed a significant rise over the same period. In both cases these moves represented a reversal of the price changes seen earlier in the year, and were not necessarily evidence of increased fragility in the market as a whole, although the extent of recent volatility could alternatively be seen as a sign of a forthcoming downturn, particularly if it should lead to an increase in the equity risk premium.##NewPara##The weakness of the euro continued, although over the month as a whole sterling was little changed despite intra-month volatility. While the decline in the euro might reflect the cyclical strength of the US economy or pessimistic views on structural reform within the euro area, this had not been mirrored in European equity markets, which had risen strongly over recent months. Nor did such hypotheses do much to explain why the euro had fallen by more than % against the yen since September.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The latest national accounts data for  Q included upwards revisions to all of the major components of final domestic demand, which was estimated to have risen by .% in the quarter, and by .% on a year earlier. Stockbuilding was now thought to be lower than earlier estimated, while the contribution of net trade to GDP growth in the quarter was unchanged, at -. percentage points.##NewPara##Industrial production had fallen in February for the third month in succession, although the size of the fall, at -.%, had been affected by a sharp decline in energy production, reflecting relatively##NewPara##mild weather for the time of year. Manufacturing production had also fallen and was now below its August level. When taken together with the net trade figures for Q, this suggested that the internationally exposed sectors were coming under renewed pressure, reflecting in part the effects of sterling s appreciation against the euro. The fall in output was quite broadly based, with chemicals and engineering (which had contributed significantly to manufacturing output growth in ) declining in February.##NewPara##Survey data were not entirely in line with this picture. The purchasing managers  index for manufacturing, produced by the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS), had risen slightly in March, and had last been below the neutral level of  in April, nearly a year ago; the output index was also higher, while new orders were little changed. In the Engineering Employers  Federation survey, the output balance remained at + in Q, with new orders again little changed. Reports from the Bank s regional Agents had suggested a resumption in manufacturing growth in February. It was possible that in some sectors volumes were being maintained only through a further reduction in margins, and that there would be limits on how much further that process could go.##NewPara##While any slowdown in parts of manufacturing might feed through into the rest of the economy, either directly or through its impact on consumer confidence, at present the services sector appeared to be buoyant. The CIPS services index for business activity had risen to . in March, its highest level since June .  The CIPS construction index also pointed to continuing growth in activity and new orders.##NewPara##The picture for retail sales was mixed.  In February volumes had fallen back from their unusually high January levels, but on a three-monthly basis growth was unchanged, at .%. The CBI Distributive Trades Survey had shown quite a marked slowdown in the growth of retail sales volumes and orders placed in March, but expectations for April remained strong. The GfK consumer confidence index was sharply down in March. The evidence suggested that while household spending remained strong, it might no longer be accelerating, although real disposable incomes still seemed to be growing rapidly. But a slowdown in consumption growth was built into the central projection in the February Inflation Report, and it was too early to say whether this would materialise.##NewPara##Taking all the evidence together, there was still a sharp contrast between the rapid growth in the services sector, and the less robust performance of manufacturing. On balance it seemed likely that growth in  Q would be little different from the central projection in the February##NewTopic##Labour market##NewPara##Whole-economy productivity growth, defined by comparing GDP with the Workforce Jobs measure of employment, had picked up to .% in the year to  Q, and to .% on an annualised basis between  Q and Q. Figures based on the Labour Force Survey (LFS) employment measure suggested slightly lower figures, at .% and .% respectively. This took annual productivity growth back towards trend, but it was too early to say whether it represented anything more than a normal cyclical response of productivity to a recovery in output growth.##NewPara##The labour market remained tight, with employment growth on the LFS measure up .% in the three months to January. Unemployment had risen on the LFS (but not the claimant-count) measure, reflecting   in an accounting sense   a fall in inactivity, with the LFS unemployment rate unchanged for the past seven months. Survey data were consistent with this picture, and the Recruitment and Employers  Confederation (REC) survey showed a significant strengthening in the demand for staff, in line with the reports of skills shortages from the Bank s regional Agents. It was suggested that the labour market measures in the Budget, when taken together with previously announced reforms, might have a small positive effect on future labour supply.##NewPara##Whole-economy average earnings growth, as measured by the headline rate, had risen to .% in the year to January. Much of the increase seemed to reflect bonus and other payments, in part related to the new millennium. A survey by the Bank s regional Agents suggested that further bonus payments were due to be made in subsequent months, particularly in March, and that this might further complicate the analysis of the data.##NewPara##Some members of the Committee considered that the pricing response by firms to an increase in earnings would depend on whether these took the form of higher settlements or faster  wage drift , (including bonuses and other payments that might be linked to productivity or profits), with some evidence suggesting that  wage drift  had a smaller effect on prices. Others believed that the effects##NewPara##of one-off increases in earnings would tend to feed through into final prices on a smoothed basis, and it was quite unclear whether in the longer term prices reacted differently to increases in earnings stemming from higher settlements, and those reflecting greater wage drift.##NewPara##Data collected by the Bank suggested that on a matched sample basis, settlements in January were if anything lower than a year previously. But the Bank s regional Agents had noted that this was not the case in services, and that pay pressures were building in some areas, with concern about settlements later in the year both in services and some parts of manufacturing.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that the labour market remained tight. While it would be wrong to react to every fluctuation in the average earnings index, given the volatility of that series and the possible distortions resulting from millennium-related factors, it was likely that the starting point for earnings in the Committee s May forecast would be above that in the February Inflation Report.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##In recent months retail prices had increased by slightly more than had been expected. Part of the reason was the increase in oil prices, but now that OPEC had decided to increase production, and aimed to stabilise oil prices at around $-$ per barrel, the upside risks to inflation from this source had diminished. The oil price now was no higher than that incorporated into the February Inflation Report for Q. How far earlier price increases had been passed through was difficult to determine, and it was possible that firms would base their pricing decisions on the new (lower) oil price rather than passing on all of the earlier increases.##NewPara##The CBI Monthly Industrial Trends Survey for March showed more respondents now expecting a fall in manufacturing output prices, perhaps reflecting competitive pressures linked to the rise in sterling against the euro. By contrast, higher oil prices had led to an increase in input prices reported in the latest CIPS manufacturing survey. The Bank s regional Agents reported that service price inflation remained relatively high, but variable across sub-sectors.##NewTopic##The world economy##NewPara##Prospects for world economic activity had strengthened further since the February##NewPara##Inflation Report, with output in the US accelerating in  Q and activity indicators remaining##NewPara##buoyant in the early part of . The prospects for the euro area had improved, particularly in Germany and France, while East Asia had recovered rapidly from its downturn, and there were also some signs of a recovery in Japan. Official interest rates had risen in the previous month in most OECD economies, and market rates suggested expectations of further increases in official rates later in the year, for instance in the US and the euro area. The prospects for inflation in the global economy would depend not only on the strength of demand growth and the reaction of monetary policy, but also on the size and distribution of world productive capacity relative to demand.##NewPara##The strength of the US economy, and uncertainty about the balance between domestic demand and supply in that country, remained important factors in any assessment of the world economy. The target Federal funds rate had been raised again in March, for the second time this year, and while there had been considerable volatility in the various US equity price indices, on balance these were now not much changed from their levels at the start of the year. To some members this suggested an increased chance of a gradual slowdown in US growth closer to trend.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##Although a majority of market participants did not expect the Committee to move rates this month, an increase in the Bank s repo rate during Q was widely forecast. The Committee had agreed in March, when a change in the repo rate would have been more of a surprise, that this of itself should not be a constraint on the Committee s decision, and that remained the case. The Committee also agreed that, while the May Inflation Report provided an opportunity to analyse the latest developments in more detail, and to set out the reasons for any change in official rates at greater length, that also did not preclude a change in rates this month.##NewPara##The Committee discussed a suggestion that it should intervene in the foreign exchange markets. The argument advanced in favour was that this could, if successful, not only be profitable but also improve the balance in the economy between the internationally exposed sectors of the economy and other sectors which were growing very rapidly, reducing the risk that the Committee would need to adjust monetary policy sharply later. Some members were not at all attracted to this view, believing that intervention would be unsuccessful and would cause confusion in the markets about the Committee s reaction function and its priorities. Some others thought that intervention in the foreign exchange market was unlikely to be successful at present, though they did not wish to rule out the##NewPara##possibility in appropriate circumstances in the future. Sterling s current strength in effective terms reflected a more general weakness of the euro against most other major currencies, and there was little evidence that the present level of sterling was seen as unsustainable or fragile by the market, at least in the short term. On this view, intervention would be effective in current circumstances only if it was accompanied by an easing of monetary policy, which would not be appropriate in the present conjuncture, and to intervene ineffectively could be counterproductive.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee discussed the case for leaving rates unchanged, and for increasing the repo rate by  basis points. For many members, the choice was finely balanced.##NewPara##Final domestic demand was growing rapidly, although in Q this had been offset in part by a large negative contribution from net trade. Some members thought that such an imbalance was not sustainable over the medium term. Although retail sales and consumer confidence had fallen back more recently, consumption still seemed robust, and while there were indications that house prices were no longer accelerating, there was little evidence of a slowdown in the housing market. Business investment growth was moderate but public investment was likely to grow rapidly. Government consumption would also boost total demand for the indefinite future. The net trade picture was more mixed, with the rise in sterling against the euro working in one direction, and stronger world demand in the other. While the services sector remained robust, manufacturing output had fallen in recent months, although survey evidence suggested a rather more resilient picture. The labour market remained tight and, whether or not higher earnings fed through into firms  prices directly, they would add to disposable incomes and hence to demand pressures. While oil prices were now easing back, input costs continued to rise, though there was little evidence of much acceleration in final prices.##NewPara##On one view, it would be better not to raise rates this month. The news over the month as a whole was inconclusive, with falls in manufacturing production, retail sales and consumer confidence, and oil prices, but with the determinants of domestic demand, both private and public, remaining robust. Against that background other factors were also important. First, the extent of price pressures stemming from the labour market required further analysis, not least in disentangling the effects of bonuses and other elements of wage drift from that of settlements. Second, the analysis##NewPara##undertaken for the Inflation Report, and the opportunity this provided to set out the Committee s thinking in detail, were valid reasons not to move this month unless there was a strong case to do so. Third, for some, the volatility in equity markets introduced a possible downside risk which might mean that any increase in rates this month would need to be reversed soon afterwards. Finally, the imbalances in the economy, manifested in another fall in manufacturing production, seemed to have worsened. An increase might exacerbate these imbalances and it was possible that the weakness in some sectors might feed through into the rest of the economy. With inflation running below target, and expected to continue to do so for a while, there was no pressing reason to raise rates straightaway. For these members, no change in the repo rate was needed this month, although for some of them it was more likely than not that there would need to be an increase in rates in due course.##NewPara##On a second view, although the news over the month was mixed, it had on balance pointed to somewhat higher prospective inflation, which was sufficient to tip the balance for some who had been close to voting for higher rates in March. The fog surrounding some of the data around the millennium date change had begun to clear. A rise in rates would no longer come as a big surprise to the market and might not lead to much change either in short-term interest rate expectations or in the exchange rate. To delay moving rates could lead to expectations that more would need to be done later, to rein back the unsustainable growth of domestic demand. While the Inflation Report would provide an opportunity to analyse recent developments in more detail, and set out the thinking of the Committee at greater length, this argument was not by itself a conclusive reason for delay. Finally, the Committee had decided in March that the timing of the Budget would not be a constraint on moving rates either that month or this. On balance therefore a rise in the repo rate of  basis points was needed this month.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be maintained at .%. Six members of the Committee (the Governor, David Clementi,##NewPara##Charles Goodhart, DeAnne Julius, Ian Plenderleith and Sushil Wadhwani) voted for the proposition. Mervyn King, Willem Buiter and John Vickers voted against, preferring a rise in rates of  basis points.