The world economy##NewPara##The Committee discussed whether there had been a material change in the world economic outlook, or in the balance of risks, since its February Inflation Report. Overall, prospects had slightly improved. In particular, US economic growth had again been strong, and was unaccompanied by manifest signs of rising inflation. It now seemed likely that growth in  would be higher than previously expected. The longer the strength of demand persisted, the greater would be the risk of the economy hitting capacity constraints and inflationary pressures emerging. Unemployment was already significantly below the level previously generally thought to be consistent with stable inflation. Productivity growth had also risen above most previous estimates of its trend, despite the length of the current expansion. The resulting uncertainty about the path of capacity output complicated US monetary policy. If any eventual tightening therefore came as a surprise, there might be a larger reaction in financial markets, particularly given the continuing strength of the equity market. The US outlook was a major area of uncertainty in the world economy.##NewPara##Economic prospects in the euro area remained subdued, and were judged to be slightly weaker than in February. While the  basis point reduction in official interest rates should help, business confidence indicators were still weak. Despite some improvement in sentiment, the economic outlook in Japan continued to be uncertain.##NewPara##Conditions in emerging market economies, taken as a whole, had improved somewhat in recent months. This was evident in the yields on US$-denominated bonds issued by emerging market economy governments, which were on average down about three percentage points relative to US##NewPara##Treasury bond yields since February. The balance of forecasts for growth in Asia was up slightly, and conditions in Brazil seemed more stable than a month ago.##NewPara##The Balkan conflict had already had economic repercussions in some neighbouring countries. It added to uncertainties more widely, and on one view created a downside risk to world activity and prices, through negative effects on confidence if the situation remained unresolved or the conflict spread. This was the kind of risk to which the Committee could if necessary react as developments occurred.##NewTopic##Monetary and financial conditions##NewPara##The Committee noted that its April reduction in interest rates had not yet been reflected fully in bank and building society rates. However, pass through of official rate changes had not always been immediate in the past, and it seemed unlikely that a greater than usual spread between private sector and official rates could be sustained for long.##NewPara##Annual broad money growth had fallen to around %, almost entirely on account of reduced money holdings by the non-bank financial sector. Assuming a trend fall in velocity of around##NewPara##% per year, aggregate monetary growth was broadly consistent with the inflation target and trend output growth.##NewPara##Developments in bank lending to different sectors were quite varied. In particular, the annual rate of growth in household credit had risen to about %, with secured lending up sharply. Mortgage loan approvals were also strong. Taken together with other signs of housing market momentum, this would need to be watched.##NewPara##Equity prices had continued to rise, with the FT-SE All-Share Index up by over % since February. The consequent boost to household wealth would tend to support consumption growth in the period ahead. Private sector investment might also be more buoyant as a result.##NewPara##A significant development in monetary and financial conditions was the further rise in sterling s effective exchange rate. The ERI was up around % since the April meeting, and was around % higher than the level implied by February s central projection. It seemed that a material part, but##NewPara##not all, of this appreciation could be explained by relative yield curve movements, the sterling yield curve having risen and the euro area yield curve having fallen, reflecting changing market assessments of the outlook for growth and, thus, monetary policy settings. Other market explanations included a change in the sterling/euro risk premium in sterling s favour, possibly related in part to the Kosovo conflict, which appeared to be consistent with the slight appreciation in the euro when there had been news of intensified diplomatic efforts; a possible longer-term rerating of relative UK economic prospects; and increased merger and acquisition-related demand for sterling, although given the liquidity and depth of the foreign exchange market, it seemed unlikely that such transaction-related factors could have had anything more than a brief effect, whereas sterling s rise had been sustained over three months.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##GDP growth in Q was now estimated to have been .%; it was probably slightly higher excluding energy industries. Since the beginning of  there had now been five consecutive quarters of below-trend growth. That should have done a lot to relieve capacity pressures, although judgments could easily differ about the precise balance of aggregate demand and supply. The economy was probably at or slightly past the trough in growth, which was set to recover towards trend.##NewPara##On the demand side, consumption growth now seemed to have been stronger in  Q than had been thought in February. The evidence available so far suggested this had been maintained into  Q. Consumer confidence had risen since February, and housing market indicators were showing signs of renewed strength.##NewPara##The outlook for investment was stronger than a quarter ago, partly reflecting the marked recovery in measures of business confidence and partly the stronger than expected outturns in the second half of . At this early stage of the new monetary framework, it was difficult to know whether the recovery in confidence was the result of the apparently sharper than expected easing of monetary policy, or whether the available measures of business confidence were simply volatile, and perhaps at times misleading, indicators.##NewPara##There were suggestions from the Bank s regional Agents that the recovery in confidence was fragile. It was not possible to substantiate this, but it seemed likely that any recovery in manufacturing sector sentiment would remain weak while sterling s strength persisted. And it was possible that household sector confidence would be vulnerable to any significant increase in unemployment.##NewPara##As discussed at the Committee s previous meeting, the counterpart to the upward revision to domestic demand growth in  Q had been a larger trade deficit. Although this was likely to increase, the current account deficit was likely to be smaller in relation to GDP, partly on account of strong net income on overseas investments.##NewTopic##Labour market conditions##NewPara##As had been the case for some time, labour market indicators painted a mixed picture. On the one hand, nominal settlements were lower, and the Reward index of nominal earnings growth was still slowing. On the other hand, the Federation of Recruitment and Employment Services had reported a slight increase in pay rates in April; and according to the revised January Average Earnings Index and the first February estimate, nominal earnings growth had stopped falling. Nominal earnings growth had in fact fallen by less than most measures of expected inflation, suggesting that expected real earnings growth might have risen. There were two reasons why wage drift - the gap between nominal earnings growth and settlements - might have increased. First, firms might be awarding any pay increases needed to comply with the National Minimum Wage rules outside the normal pay round. Second, there might have been an increase in bonuses, but this was difficult to judge as the ONS s question about bonuses had recently changed, so that there was a break in the series.##NewPara##The labour market remained tight. Employment had been increasing even though output growth had been below trend for the past  months or so. Measured by headcount, employment had continued to rise recently, although by less in  Q than in  Q. Taken at face value, this might suggest that the labour market was still tightening. However, part of the increase was accounted for by a rise in the number of part-time workers. Overtime hours had fallen. Overall, hours worked per head had also fallen. Unemployment had risen slightly, but was still close to a  year low. According to the latest British Chambers of Commerce survey, employment intentions##NewPara##were less positive in services and flat in manufacturing. Evidence on skill shortages and recruitment difficulties had also suggested some easing, but the picture was not clear.##NewPara##Taking all the evidence together, the Committee judged that nominal earnings growth would be lower in the remainder of  and in  than had been expected in February, partly due to the sustained fall in inflation expectations.##NewTopic##Prices##NewPara##Although the Bank s index of non-oil commodity prices had fallen % in the year to March, the twelve-month rate of decline was now much lower than throughout  and into , and the index had risen by % during March itself. Oil prices continued to rise, reflecting supply policy changes. It had been suggested that some commodity prices had fallen close to marginal production costs, making it unlikely that prices would continue to fall.##NewPara##Manufacturing input prices (excluding food, beverages, tobacco and petrol) had been flat in March, but were still down  % on a year ago. Manufacturing output prices (excluding food, beverages, tobacco and petrol) were also flat.##NewPara##Overall, it seemed likely that the downward pressure on RPIX inflation of falling world commodity prices would come to an end during the two-year forecast period. The RPIX inflation rate had spiked up in March due to the timing of the introduction of various Budget measures. It was expected to fall back in April.##NewTopic##The May inflation and growth projections##NewPara##The Committee agreed the projections to be published in the Inflation Report on  May.##NewPara##On the assumption of constant official interest rates of .%, the central projection for output growth rose to around the economy s trend rate of growth by the middle of . The risks were broadly balanced.##NewPara##The central projection for inflation was broadly in line with the target over the forecast period. It fell slightly below target for the next year or so, principally on account of sterling s recent appreciation and the lower assumed path for earnings growth; and then rose to about  % at the two year horizon, as demand strengthened and the effects of sterling s appreciation wore off.##NewPara##The central projection assumed that sterling s effective exchange rate would depreciate in line with uncovered interest rate parity (ie interest rate differentials). If sterling was likely to fall by more than this, as indicated by most outside forecasts, the balance of risks to inflation was on the upside. That was the view of a majority of the Committee. Some members judged, however, that the balance of risks to inflation was on the downside because they thought sterling was likely to be in line with or stronger than the path assumed in the central projection, and also saw downside risks from weaker than assumed world activity and prices, and from greater pressure on margins.##NewTopic##Other considerations relevant to the policy decision##NewPara##The Committee discussed a range of other issues relevant to its policy decision.##NewPara##How much weight should the Committee place on the central projection for inflation being slightly below target for the next year or so but roughly at target, and rising, at the two year horizon? A number of possible arguments were identified. First, the central projection s saucer shape was largely attributable to sterling s recent appreciation, the effects of which would be temporary. Second, the Committee could consider whether there was a path for policy that could underpin activity growth in the relatively short run while not endangering achievement of the inflation target at and beyond the forecast horizon; this might be achieved by a temporary reduction in interest rates. Third, it was possible that the new monetary framework had altered expectations and thus the speed of the transmission mechanism, with shorter lags from changes in policy to the effects on output and inflation. Views varied on these issues.##NewPara##What did the recent strength of sterling imply for policy? Sterling s renewed appreciation presented a dilemma for policy. It had exacerbated the imbalances in the economy, given the already considerable pressures on exporters and producers competing domestically with imports. The implications for inflation, and thus for monetary policy, depended on the reasons for the appreciation. To the extent that it reflected changed perceptions of the outlook for UK monetary##NewPara##policy, policy should respond only if market expectations were materially wrong. Otherwise, depending on the effect on interest rate expectations, reducing official interest rates now might increase expected inflation. The Committee had agreed, however, that relative yield curve movements did not explain the whole of sterling s recent rise, which would therefore tend to put downward pressure on inflation in the near term. In principle, the forecast process should identify and quantify the various influences on sterling, but this assessment was inevitably imprecise.##NewPara##Given the dilemma for policy created by sterling s rise, the Committee noted that it could, in principle, use two other instruments. The first was a statement explaining the part played by sterling in its eventual policy decision. This option was available whatever the decision on interest rates.##NewPara##The second was foreign exchange intervention. A range of views was expressed. It was possible that combining a reduction in interest rates and a statement with publicly-announced intervention might help to underline the Committee s concerns about the exchange rate. The Committee did not believe that intervention could materially affect the balance between demand and supply in the foreign exchange market; rather it would help to underline the Committee s view about the implications of sterling s strength. However, given that sterling currently seemed well supported in the market, it was not possible to be confident that intervention would have the desired effect, and it could possibly have a perverse effect. It was also important not to confuse the market about the role of the exchange rate in the Committee s analysis and reaction function, which were geared to the inflation target.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##On one view, there was not yet a convincing case for a further reduction in interest rates. First, the balance of news over the month had been broadly neutral. While sterling had risen in the past month, part of that reflected the stronger outlook for UK output growth. Moreover, mortgage credit growth and approvals and other housing market indicators were stronger; there was more evidence that the trough in output growth had been passed, so that the outlook was now more for a  gentle take off  than  a soft landing ; the labour market was apparently still tight, although the evidence was mixed and hard to assess; and the falls in commodity and import prices seemed to be coming to an end. Second, the inflation forecast, which incorporated all the news##NewPara##over the quarter including sterling s sharp rise, did not decisively point to an interest rate reduction. Two years out, the central projection (the mode) was near the target but rising, and with the balance of risks on the upside. If rates were to be reduced by a further  basis points, both the mode and the mean would be above the target at two years. Thus, any immediate reduction in rates would probably be short-lived, especially if sterling fell back, as assumed in the projections.##NewPara##Third, it was important not to create confusion about how the Committee analysed and responded to exchange rate changes. There were dangers in appearing to change interest rates in response to high frequency movements in the exchange rate. In particular, it would be highly undesirable if the market reached the mistaken conclusion that the Committee had a simple rule of thumb for trading off interest rate changes against exchange rate changes. A further reduction in interest rates could not be ruled out if the risks of undershooting the inflation target increased. But it would be better to see more evidence on the position of the labour market and on domestic inflationary pressures generally, and whether sterling s strength persisted. A statement explaining that policy might need to be eased further if sterling remained so high would therefore be useful.##NewPara##On a second view there was a clearer case for an immediate further reduction of  basis points. The central projection was below target throughout the forecast period.  Moreover, contrary to the majority view as reflected in the Inflation Report fan chart, the balance of risks to inflation was on the downside. There were not good grounds for expecting sterling to fall by more than implied by interest rate differentials - on the contrary it was plausible that it would remain strong given the range of factors supporting it; the risks to world activity and prices were on the downside; and there could be greater pressure on margins than assumed in the central projection. The current stance of policy was still restrictive. A statement connecting a cut to sterling s strength would also be desirable, possibly combined with intervention.##NewPara##In the view of most members of the Committee, the arguments were finely balanced between no change and a small reduction. The projection did not require a further cut in interest rates but would not be inconsistent with one. The judgment was therefore partly a matter of tactics, and centred on the best approach to addressing the problems with the balance of the economy created by sterling s strength, consistent with achieving the inflation target. Arguments identified for an immediate cut were as follows. Inflation was projected to be below target throughout the forecast period. The risks of undershooting in the relatively near term were greater than of overshooting further out, especially if the new monetary framework had increased the speed of the transmission##NewPara##mechanism. Given the saucer shape of the projection, with inflation rising through and beyond the second year, delay could mean losing the opportunity for a future reduction, and could therefore risk denting confidence, which in some sectors remained fragile. It would also be easier this month to explain the role played by the exchange rate in a decision to reduce rates, given that the Inflation Report was being published the following week; the Report could explain the Committee s analysis of the recent appreciation and make clear that there was no simple rule of thumb relating changes in the exchange rate and interest rates. That might be less easy in a non-Inflation Report month.##NewPara##Arguments identified against reducing rates, in addition to those summarised in paragraph , were as follows. There was not a pressing need to take further action at present to underpin output given that it was projected to recover towards trend, and it was in any case possible that some easing of conditions would come from sterling declining, as projected, at least in line with interest rate differentials. A cut now might therefore mean that rates had to be increased quite soon. In principle there should be no problems with that. But given the still incomplete understanding of the Committee s monetary policy reaction function, such a reversal might adversely affect sentiment.##NewPara##The uncertainties about the effects of a further reduction might also warrant caution. Whether or not rates were reduced, a statement drawing out the implications of the exchange rate for policy would be useful. If rates were left unchanged, the statement could explain that if sterling were to remain so strong then, depending on other developments in the economy, interest rates might have to be reduced in order to reduce the risks of undershooting the target. It was also argued by some that the case for a reduction would be stronger if it could sensibly be accompanied by foreign exchange intervention as well as a statement. If, however, the case for intervention could not effectively be made in current market circumstances, which was the view of some members, then the argument for an immediate reduction was weaker.##NewPara##The Governor invited the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be maintained at .%. Five members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, Alan Budd, Charles Goodhart and John Vickers) voted for the proposition. Four members of the Committee (David Clementi, Willem Buiter, DeAnne Julius and Ian Plenderleith) voted against, preferring a reduction of  basis points.