Financial markets##NewPara##Short-term interest rates in the United Kingdom had fallen by up to  basis points over the past month. Euro-area rates had fallen by less, and US rates had risen. The major influences on UK rates appeared to have been domestic economic indicators and changing market perceptions of the likely future path of monetary policy. None of the economists surveyed in the latest Reuters and Bloomberg surveys had expected a change in the repo rate in October, and mean expectations for the repo rate at the end of  had fallen to below % in the Reuters survey.##NewPara##Movements in longer-term interest rates in the United Kingdom, the United States and the euro area had not been large. It was notable that implied volatilities of longer-term interest rates had eased in many international markets during , suggesting that the uncertainty felt by market participants about prospective long-term interest rates had fallen.##NewPara##The sterling exchange rate index (ERI) had fallen by over % since the Committee s September meeting, leaving it around % below its level at the time of the August Inflation Report. The movement was larger than could be accounted for by changes in the differentials between UK and foreign interest rates. The Committee noted other possible influences. First, sterling appeared to have fallen in response to indicators of weaker domestic demand, and to a downward shift in the expected future path of interest rates, even though movements in interest differentials had been modest. Second, market participants might have given weight to the deterioration in the UK current account, believing that the longer-term equilibrium value of sterling might be lower than previously thought. UK export performance had been surprisingly weak for some time. And the markets might be placing increasing##NewPara##weight on the fact that the UK net trade balance in oil was deteriorating.##NewPara##Equity prices had risen in the major international markets since the Committee s September meeting. UK equities had outperformed those in most other markets, in local currency terms: the FTSE All-Share index had risen by over % since  September. Although the balance of news about near-term demand conditions had probably been weaker than expected, other factors had been more supportive for UK equities. The fall in the exchange rate would improve the competitiveness of UK firms selling goods abroad, and would increase the sterling value of the foreign currency earnings of firms quoted in the United Kingdom and operating in other countries. And the fall in interest rates would have reduced the rate at which future corporate earnings would be discounted in valuing equities.##NewTopic##The international economy##NewPara##The world economy was likely to grow more rapidly in  than for some  years. Prospects for  still appeared robust.##NewPara##Euro-area output appeared to be growing at around its trend rate, and the outlook was still broadly consistent with the August Inflation Report projections. The indicators for the third quarter were mixed. On the output side, euro-area industrial production had risen in July, and had expanded in five of the past six months, but the purchasing managers  indices (PMIs) for both manufacturing and services had eased in September. On the expenditure side, retail sales had fallen in August, but business and consumer confidence had both improved in September. Although German domestic demand growth remained weaker than for the euro area as a whole, there were some brighter signs. Retail sales had increased in August, although this was an erratic series. And, on a longer-term perspective, German competitiveness had been improving for some time. Nevertheless, the weakness of domestic demand posed downside risks.  The flash estimate of euro-area inflation had shown a small fall in September, to .%.##NewPara##Estimated GDP growth for  Q in the United States had been revised up from .% to .%. This nevertheless represented slower growth than in the previous four quarters, and it was important to assess whether this softness would be temporary. Here too, indicators for  Q had been mixed. On the output side, the growth rate of industrial production had weakened in August. The##NewPara##manufacturing and non-manufacturing Institute of Supply Management (ISM) surveys had eased in September, although both remained at levels that were consistent with continuing strong growth.##NewPara##Turning to domestic demand, consumption had been flat in August after showing strong growth in July. Consumer confidence had fallen slightly in September, and remained below its average for the past ten years, possibly affected by higher petrol prices. Prospects for consumer confidence would in part depend on employment, where some recent indicators had been moderately encouraging: initial unemployment claims had remained at a relatively low level and the employment components in both ISM indices had increased in September. By contrast, the rate of monetary growth was slowing: the broad money aggregate (M) had grown by only .% in the year to August, which might suggest softer medium-term prospects. The economic outlook would be sensitive to any further large movements in the oil price, but consumer and producer price indicators for August suggested some easing in inflationary pressure. Overall, the prospects for activity were perhaps slightly weaker than at the time of the August Inflation Report.##NewPara##The US current account deficit had risen to over  % of GDP in  Q, and was likely to rise further. While it was unlikely to be sustainable in the medium term, it was not clear by what means and how rapidly the adjustment would take place, and that posed risks for the global economy.##NewPara##GDP growth in Japan had been revised down to .% in  Q. However, this weakness appeared to be temporary; the latest Tankan survey and industrial production data were consistent with a pickup in Q. Growth in China and the rest of Asia continued to be buoyant.##NewPara##Oil prices had risen sharply. West Texas Intermediate now stood at over $ per barrel, an increase of over % since the Committee s previous meeting, bringing the rise since the beginning of the year to about %. The implications for world economic prospects depended on the extent to which the increase turned out to be permanent, and on the degree to which the fuel intensity of global production adjusted to the price rise. There were reasons to believe that at least some of the latest increase might be temporary. First, both US oil production and oil stocks had been affected by Hurricane Ivan. Second, the price differentials between different grades of oil had widened recently; sustained increases in oil prices had in the past tended to be associated with similar increases in prices across all grades. Third, oil futures prices for delivery dates out to  had not increased by as much as the spot price. Futures prices for mid- were around $ per barrel. Nevertheless, the futures price was now well above the level that had been thought sustainable two years ago, and this reflected##NewPara##some influences which might be more persistent: the increasing demand from rapidly growing Asian economies, and supply constraints. Even if the futures price remained at this level, the recent rise in oil prices could be expected to have only a modest adverse impact on global growth, but with a downside risk if business and consumer confidence were severely damaged. So far the rise in oil prices did not appear to have given rise to second-round effects on wages and inflation in the major industrial countries.##NewTopic##Money, credit, demand and output##NewPara##The Q National Accounts release had shown an unrevised estimate of .% for UK GDP in  Q. Estimated manufacturing output growth had been revised up, but this had been largely offset by a downward revision to construction output.##NewPara##The balance of output indicators for  Q had been softer than expected at the time of the August Inflation Report. Indicators of service sector output suggested an easing of growth in the third quarter, but an informal survey by the Agents was more positive about growth prospects in most subsectors. Manufacturing output was reported to have fallen by .% in August, the third consecutive monthly fall, and the previous estimate for July was revised downwards. That was a weaker picture than suggested by the evidence from business surveys, and it was possible that the latest estimates would subsequently be revised up.  The CIPS manufacturing PMI had fallen slightly in September after a larger fall in August, although it was still consistent with expansion, and reports from the Bank s regional Agents suggested that manufacturing output growth might have passed its peak in Q. The CIPS construction survey had suggested a strengthening picture during Q. Overall, the near-term outlook for output growth had probably softened, but the extent of this was uncertain. And it was also difficult at this stage to identify the demand counterparts to the easing of output growth in Q.##NewPara##On the demand side, the National Accounts release had reported revised estimates for consumption growth of .% and .% respectively in  Q and Q. There were some indications that consumer spending had eased further in the third quarter: retail sales growth, although still buoya nt, appeared to be easing; private car sales in September were down % on a year earlier; and the CBI Distributive Trades survey had suggested weaker retail activity in September compared with a year earlier. There were, however, some factors supporting consumer spending.  Unsecured lending growth, particularly the growth of credit card lending, had turned up, probably encouraged by the fall##NewPara##over the past year in the spread between unsecured interest rates paid by borrowers and the repo rate. And estima tes for personal disposable income in the first half of  had been stronger than expected. Overall, it was not clear that consumption was slowing by any more than would have been expected given the increases in the repo rate and the fall in house price inflation.##NewPara##House price inflation in the third quarter, at .% according to the average of the Halifax and Nationwide indices, had been rather lower than expected at the time of the Inflation Report, and the latest survey from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) showed a sharp fall in the net balance of respondents reporting house price rises in the past three months, suggesting that the rate of increase in house prices had turned downwards. Indicators of housing market activity continued to ease. However, the number of housing loan approvals and the ratio of sales to stocks in the RICS survey were at broadly similar levels to the period of temporary weakness in early .##NewPara##The estimate for the quarterly growth of whole-economy investment in  Q had been revised up to .% in the latest National Accounts, and estimated business investment growth had been revised up to .%. Investment growth had been expected to ease in the August Inflation Report projections, but there could be upside risks to this outlook. Corporate profitability for both oil and non-oil companies had increased in ; estimated productivity growth had recently improved; corporates  broad money deposit growth and their resort to external finance had increased during Q; and corporate capital gearing at market value had fallen in Q, all of which would be consistent with strengthening investment. In the medium term, the fall in the exchange rate would also tend to support investment, if it persisted. But there could also be downside risks, if oil prices remained high or if domestic and external demand weakened. The Committee noted that optimism had fallen in both business and consumer services, according to the September CIPS services survey, and the investme nt intentions surveys so far available for Q were a little disappointing.##NewPara##Net trade was estimated to have made a zero contribution to growth in  Q, and UK export growth continued to be relatively weak, given the pickup in world activity and trade. The most recent weakness of exports had not been wholly consistent with the evidence from surveys, and the export data had been both erratic and prone to revision in recent years. Nevertheless, UK exporters were apparently continuing to lose market share more rapidly than expected. That might reflect a long-term adjustment of supply capacity to the appreciation of sterling since , which had resulted in a squeeze on exporters  profit margins. The recent easing in sterling, if maintained, might be a##NewPara##supportive influence for exports. It was also possible that the fall in the share of world trade experienced by UK exporters was in degree misleading, because there had been particularly rapid growth in intraregional trade and activity in regions such as Asia.##NewPara##The growth rate of notes and coin in circulation had increased to .% in September, but still showed a longer-term downward trend consistent with some easing in the growth of the value of retail sales and consumption. The annual growth rate of broad money, excluding holdings by  other financial corporations , had increased to .% in August, the highest rate since the inception of the Committee. The recent increase in growth might partly be associated with a change in household portfolio preferences towards bank deposits, although companies  money holdings had also grown strongly and the annual growth rate of nominal GDP had also been increasing slowly, to stand at .% in  Q.##NewTopic##Wages, costs and prices##NewPara##Although labour market conditions rema ined tight, the Workforce jobs data now corroborated the Labour Force Survey (LFS) in suggesting that employment growth had moderated during the year.##NewPara##LFS and claimant count unemployment had recently been stable. There had been a rise in measured inactivity. Pay pressures remained muted.  Whole-economy settlements were little changed in the latest month; the annual growth rate of regular pay was also flat; and annual whole-economy earnings growth in the three months to July had fallen by . percentage points compared with the three months to June, although the data had been hard to interpret because of possible changes in the pattern of bonuses. Given the perceived tightness of the labour market, the recent rise in inflation on the RPI measure to over % (reflecting higher mortgage interest payments), and strong corporate profitability, it was perhaps surprising that pay pressures had not been stronger. The labour share of income had not increased so far in .##NewPara##CPI inflation had fallen to .% in August. In line with pre-release arrangements, an advance estimate of CPI inflation in September had been provided to the Governor   working days ahead of publication, and this had suggested a fall in the rate to .%. The Committee noted that inflation had so far turned out materially lower than it had projected earlier in the year despite the sharp rise in oil and petrol prices. It was difficult to assess whether the factors bringing about this forecast error would unwind, or alternatively whether the y would continue or even intensify. Much of the forecast error##NewPara##could be accounted for by lower-than-expected prices of food and financial services, and several different factors   the weather, technological improvements, and intensifying competition   had probably contributed. But at the aggregate level, the argument that competition had strengthened was not supported by the rise in corporate profitability in , unless that merely reflected the strength of the business cycle.##NewPara##There was some limited evidence of price pressures earlier in the supply chain. The UK import price deflator had risen by .% in Q. Producer input price inflation had risen from .% in July to .% in August, while producer output price inflation had been stable at .%. Although the growth of labour costs remained subdued, it was not clear whether producers  margins would absorb a further fall in sterling. The output price balance in the CIPS services survey in September was still near its four-year high reached in August, but in the manufacturing survey the output price balance had fallen back a little from its June record high.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The August Inflation Report had described a central projection, conditioned on the gently rising path for the repo rate implied by the market yield curve at the time, in which the world economy maintained a strong and broadly based recovery, the UK economy also showed robust growth in activity, and CPI inflation rose to around the % target in the second year of the forecast. There was now a good deal of subsequent information to assess. The fall in sterling and in UK market interest rates, and the rise in equity prices, would all tend to support activity and inflation. Broad money growth was increasing, and unsecured lending growth had also turned up. But there were signs that output had been growing less strongly in the third quarter than previously expected. Activity and inflation in the housing market were easing. The labour market, although tight, had not tightened further, and consumer price inflation had fallen further below target. In the global economy, it was likely that activity growth in the United States and Japan would pick up from the slower rates in Q, although US indicators in Q were mixed and perhaps less buoyant than expected; the euro area outside Germany seemed likely to maintain growth at around its trend rate; and prospects in non- Japan Asia looked strong. The further rise in the oil price was unlikely to persist in full, although there were substantial risks to this outlook.##NewPara##Members concluded that no change in the repo rate was appropriate this month. While the impact of the latest data on output and demand would probably be on the downside in the near term, financial market developments, and in particular the fall in the exchange rate, would be supportive. The forthcoming Inflation Report process would allow the Committee to weigh all these developments together in assessing the outlook for inflation. There were also several puzzles in the current conjuncture, for example between the apparent tightness of the labour market and modest pay pressures, and between gradually accelerating broad money and nominal GDP, and low and stable consumer price inflation. These issues added to the uncertainty of the outlook for inflation, and the Committee would be able to consider them further during the November Inflation Report round.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.