The world economy##NewPara##Recent data tended to confirm the recent strong performance of the US economy and to suggest signs of a recovery in Japan. But growth in the euro area remained weak.##NewPara##In the United States, growth was likely to remain robust in the second half of the year. The key question was whether this strength would be sustained into . Real consumption had increased by .% on the month in July and .% in August, but it was not clear that rapid consumption growth would continue, and there were signs of weaker spending in September. Consumer confidence remained subdued, with both the Conference Board and University of Michigan measures falling slightly. Concerns about employment prospects may have been weighing on households: more people were reporting that jobs were hard to find, and non-farm payrolls were still more than a million below their level in November . But consumers had benefited further in August from tax rebates, and some might still have scope to refinance their mortgages at lower interest rates, given the recent fall in market rates.##NewPara##US industrial production had risen by .% on the month in August, according to the latest available data release, while new orders for capital goods had fallen slightly. It was not yet clear whether the pick-up in investment would be sustained or whether it simply reflected the arrival of a postponed replacement cycle. Information, communications and technology production had risen by .% on the month; it was possible that companies that had postponed IT investment were now beginning to replace old software and equipment. The Institute of Supply Management indices##NewPara##together suggested that overall output growth might slow a little between Q and Q: both the manufacturing and non-manufacturing indices had fallen slightly in September, although the latter remained close to its all-time high. The combination of fairly robust output growth with little increase in employment implied rapid productivity growth; annual US non-farm business sector labour productivity growth had been over % in  Q. Ultimately that would stimulate aggregate demand by raising expected real income growth, increasing the incentive to invest and improving the price competitiveness of US goods and services.##NewPara##More generally, US aggregate demand would continue to be stimulated by the expansionary fiscal stance, reflecting the increase in defence spending and the administration s Jobs and Growth package. Monetary policy, too, was supportive and, judging by recent falls in the US yield curve, financial market participants were persuaded that the FOMC would remain very accommodative for some time. The % fall in the dollar s effective exchange rate over the past month should also help to sustain demand.##NewPara##In the euro area, there continued to be a contrast between weak data outturns and more promising business survey indicators, in particular the forward-looking components. GDP had fallen by .% in the second quarter, according to the latest data   below the earlier flash estimate. Investment and net trade had made the main contributions to the decrease. On the basis of available indicators, it looked likely that GDP would turn out to have been broadly flat in the year to Q. Germany, Italy and the Netherlands had each had two consecutive quarters of economic contraction, and data for France had surprised on the downside. But recent business surveys were more encouraging. Euro-area industrial confidence had increased in both August and September, and the German IFO index had risen for the fifth consecutive month. The euro-area manufacturing Purchasing Managers  Index (PMI) had risen above  for the first time since February and the services PMI had reached its highest level since    April . However, the improvements were largely due to stronger expectations of future, not current, conditions, and such surveys had proved misleading last year. There were no obvious signs of a consumer-led recovery: German retail sales (excluding car-related sales) and French consumer spending on manufactured goods both fell in August, and euro-area consumer confidence was flat in September. Nevertheless, taking a longer perspective, euro-area final domestic demand growth had picked up somewhat, even though it was still below trend. But this had been counteracted by the increasingly negative contribution of net trade; how that evolved would depend on how the impact of the appreciation of the euro weighed against the growth of the euro area s external markets.##NewPara##According to the September German manufacturing PMI survey, firms were more optimistic about exports. However, it was possible that this sentiment pre-dated the most recent rise in the effective exchange rate of the euro.##NewPara##In Japan, the expenditure-based estimate of GDP growth in Q had been revised up, to % (quarter on quarter). The output-based all-activity index, however, suggested a much lower rate of around .%. The real GDP estimates needed to be treated with caution: they were particularly prone to revision and the recent figures relied on an estimated decline of the GDP deflator that seemed surprisingly large given other price developments. However, there were some signs of possible economic recovery. The revision to business investment in Q was due to an upward revision in nominal spending, not a downward revision in the deflator. Real household spending had increased, and unemployment had fallen, in August, while the September Tankan survey reported improvements in corporate sentiment, particularly amongst large manufacturers (although it most probably took place before the recent appreciation of the yen).##NewPara##The emerging markets of Asia continued to report rapid growth.##NewTopic##Financial markets, money and credit##NewPara##Short-term interest rates around the world had fallen a little since the previous MPC meeting, although a partial reversal had been triggered by the most recent US non-farm payrolls data. The falls seemed to reflect the impact of a few weaker-than-expected international data releases on views about the strength of the global recovery. It was also likely that financial market participants had changed their view of the FOMC s policy stance. Sterling interest rates had fallen rather less than in the United States and the euro area. This could be because financial market participants had interpreted recent UK economic data (new and revised) as implying relatively robust growth; they might have taken that and the most recent MPC minutes to imply that UK short-term rates would rise relative to those of other countries. That view of relative prospects was also reflected in equity markets: in common currency terms, the FTSE All-Share index had performed relatively strongly.##NewPara##The % appreciation of the euro relative to the dollar was difficult to explain in terms of news about relative euro-area and US growth prospects. Some of the appreciation could be accounted for by differential interest rate movements. Another factor may have been renewed concerns about the##NewPara##sustainability of the US current account, possibly reinforced by market interpretations of the recent G communiqu . The sterling effective exchange rate had remained fairly stable, falling a little just before the Committee s meeting.##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, the twelve-month rate of increase of unsecured lending to individuals fell back a little in August, but secured lending continued to expand rapidly. There were signs of a pick-up in housing market activity; approvals for house purchase (adjusted for working days in the month) had increased to a ten-year high in August, and the House Builders Federation series for net reservations of new houses also rose sharply. House-price inflation seemed to have stopped falling; monthly price increases had been averaging just over % recently, and house prices in the third quarter were likely to have been somewhat above the level expected at the time of the August Inflation Report.##NewPara##What might explain the renewed buoyancy of the housing market? First, the equilibrium ratio of house prices to earnings might be higher than had previously been thought, so that house prices were less far above equilibrium   and therefore under less pressure to ease. But prices were now well above the Committee s previous best estimate of equilibrium, which had itself already been revised upwards last year. Second, the lenders  indices for house prices might have been exaggerating the underlying rate of increase, as they did not adjust fully for improvements in housing quality; and the RICS survey balances earlier this year had, for example, pointed to lower house price increases than had the lenders  indices. But this seemed an unconvincing explanation. Third, the recent rise in house prices might have been driven in part by speculative behaviour and/or over-optimistic views about the sustainable level of house prices.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##New National Accounts data had become available in the past month. These incorporated some new information on nominal spending, including corrections for the effects of  missing trader intra- community  fraud on recorded trade; methodological changes; and the usual annual Blue Book revisions. The data revealed a somewhat different pattern of growth over recent years than had previously been estimated, including an upward revision to growth in the first half of this year. This could have implications for the Committee s assessment of both aggregate demand and potential supply in the economy.##NewPara##Growth was now estimated to have been stronger in  and  than previously reported, mainly because of revisions to the split of nominal quantities between price and volume, rather than to the nominal data themselves; estimated growth since  was less affected. This meant that the level of GDP had been higher than previously thought for some time, and in  Q had been around one percentage point higher. However, that did not necessarily imply that aggregate demand was higher relative to potential supply; or, even if that were the case, that inflationary pressure was higher than previously thought. First, revisions to the estimated composition of aggregate demand suggested that business investment had been considerably higher in the recent past, so the capital stock and potential supply would now be somewhat higher than previously thought. Second, data for costs and for retail prices were unchanged. If the balance of aggregate supply and demand had implied less downward pressure on inflation than previously believed, some other factor must have offset this. For example, product market competition might have squeezed margins more than had been appreciated; or domestic producers  margins might have been more compressed by the past strength of sterling.##NewPara##Furthermore, looking forward, since the current level of business investment now appeared to be higher than previously thought, the capital stock and potential supply would be growing more rapidly than believed hitherto. However, the data revisions also increased the uncertainty about the prospects for investment. On the one hand, as the capital stock was likely to be higher than estimated before, there would be less need for investment to achieve a given desired capital stock. On the other hand, given that the relative price deflator for capital goods had fallen more sharply than previously thought, firms might want a bigger capital stock than previously realised.##NewPara##As well as affecting estimates of aggregate demand and potential supply, the data revisions   which included for the first time an allowance for unreported imports related to VAT fraud   changed the picture of the pattern of growth in the past. Real consumption had not increased quite as rapidly as had previously been believed, and the negative contribution to growth from net trade had been less, so the divergence between domestic and external demand now looked less pronounced. Also, the improvement in the terms of trade since  now appeared a little less marked, and hence more likely to be sustainable. However, the recent current account deficit appeared to have been larger than previously thought.##NewPara##The upward revision in the estimate of GDP growth in  Q, to .%, and the downward revision to consumption growth, made it easier to reconcile the output and expenditure data for the##NewPara##second quarter. Last month, there had been the puzzle that apparently weak second-quarter output growth could only be reconciled with the estimated strong domestic demand growth by a large negative net trade contribution; but that had seemed unlikely, given the trade data (after allowing for the impact of VAT fraud). The revision to overall output growth in the second quarter was largely due to a substantial upward revision in the estimate of construction output, particularly in the public sector. Construction output in the first quarter had been surprisingly weak. This series tended to be volatile, though, so the new second-quarter figure might be erratically strong. Estimated service sector growth had been revised down from .% to .%. That looked weak given business survey data, so there might be subsequent upward revisions, but it was also possible that there was less momentum in this sector than had been thought.##NewPara##The .% fall in industrial production in August was greater than expected, but was nonetheless consistent with output growth in Q and Q being close to trend. The CIPS surveys of manufacturing, services and construction all pointed to a steady increase in the pace of activity through the third quarter; the CIPS activity index for services in September reached its highest level since April . The CBI surveys of financial services and distributive trades were also encouraging.##NewPara##On the demand side, the consumption profile now looked more plausible, with quarterly growth averaging .% across the last quarter of  and the first half of this year. However, at the time of the August Inflation Report, the Committee had expected consumption to slow significantly in the second half of this year, and it was not clear that that was happening. Retail sales had picked up in August, with volumes rising .%. Unemployment remained low and there were signs of continued strength in the housing market; both of these factors would tend to sustain consumption growth.##NewPara##The corporate sector, too, appeared to be performing more strongly than had been thought: according to the latest data, firms had been investing and building up stocks more than previously realised, and rates of return in manufacturing and services had been a little higher. The number of profit warnings had fallen and UK equity prices had been relatively resilient. New orders for investment goods were increasing significantly.##NewPara##The estimate of real government consumption corresponded to an unusually rapid increase in the government spending deflator, which might have been exaggerated by the lack of adjustment for quality improvements in public services. It might in part also reflect the short-term sunk costs of IT##NewPara##projects and organisational change that would generate efficiency gains in the future. If real government spending had been increasing faster than measured, for given inputs, that would not increase inflationary pressure, as faster productivity growth in the public sector would not have affected private sector costs and the output gap significantly.##NewTopic##The labour market, costs and prices##NewPara##Now that estimates of output in the first half of the year had been revised upwards, recent labour market data were more comprehensible: measured labour productivity growth was no longer surprisingly low, and there had probably been less labour hoarding than previously thought. The working-age employment rate rose a little in the three months to July and the unemployment rate, on the Labour Force Survey measure, was unchanged. The claimant unemployment rate had been constant since January .##NewPara##There was some evidence that the demand for labour in the private sector was picking up. For the first time in four years, the CIPS employment surveys for manufacturing, services and construction all reported increased employment in September. Both the CBI and the Bank s regional Agents reported some worsening of skill shortages, and an informal survey by the Agents suggested that private sector firms expected stronger employment growth over the rest of the year.##NewPara##So far, this apparent increase in labour demand did not appear to have affected the growth of earnings. Whole-economy average earnings growth was still within the - % range prevailing so far this year, and private sector pay settlements continued to average around %. The increase in labour demand, together with the sharp rise in the rate of increase of the Tax and Price Index over the past year, was likely to put upward pressure on pay at some stage. The National Minimum Wage increased on  October from  . an hour to  .; a further increase, to  . an hour, was planned for##NewPara## October . The most recent upward step exceeded the growth of average earnings, so a larger proportion of the workforce was likely to be affected; that might entail a bigger impact than before on the aggregate wage bill and prices, but the overall effect was nonetheless expected to be small.##NewPara##The annual rate of RPIX inflation had been .% in August, the same as in July, and broadly as expected. The differential between the annual inflation rates for goods and services had narrowed, and was now the smallest it had been since September . In line with established pre-release##NewPara##arrangements, an advance estimate of the RPI had been provided to the Governor   working days ahead of publication. This suggested that annual RPIX inflation had been .% in September. The short-run outlook seemed a little stronger than a month ago.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##Outside observers regarded a rise in the repo rate as slightly more likely this month than last, but an increase would nevertheless be a surprise. According to the Reuters poll, taken between##NewPara## September and  October, respondents attached a mean probability of % to a  basis point rise and % to  no change . The mean of external forecasts of the policy rate at the end of  was .% and at the end of  was .%, both up a little on the month. Since the poll, there had been more discussion in the press about the possibility of a rate rise. One factor affecting market expectations was speculation about the timing of the Chancellor s proposed switch to an inflation target based on the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices and about the level at which the new target might be set.##NewPara##The Committee considered the implications of the fact that, were the repo rate raised at this meeting, it would be the first increase for well over three years. An increase might be regarded as signalling the start of a succession of increases in the repo rate, and might therefore have a larger-than- usual effect on market rates. Although financial market participants now generally expected the next move in rates to be upwards, they would probably be surprised if the increase were agreed at this meeting; for that reason as well, there might be a sharper-than-normal market reaction.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee agreed that the decision this month was between whether to raise the repo rate or to hold it at its current level. As far as the international environment was concerned, the outlook was stronger for the United States and possibly for Japan than for the euro area. The US recovery was broadly on track, but there was still uncertainty about whether consumption would remain resilient in the face of a weak labour market and whether the pick-up in business investment would be sustained. Significant sectoral imbalances remained, which might at some stage trigger changes in spending and further depress the dollar. But US fiscal and monetary policies remained expansionary and were likely to do so for some time; expectations to that effect were reflected in the US yield curve. Some##NewPara##members placed more emphasis than others on the recent increase in non-farm payrolls and the possible benefits of rapid productivity growth for demand in the near term; on one view, the downside risks to US demand identified at the time of the August Inflation Report had receded somewhat. The level of economic activity in the euro area continued to disappoint. It was unclear whether recovery had been delayed a little or whether a more extended period of subdued growth was now in prospect. Some members were inclined to put more weight than others on the signs of strengthening in euro-area business surveys. Recent data from Japan pointed to a pick-up in growth there, but doubts remained about their reliability. Growth in the rest of the world had been robust; whether it would remain so were US growth to falter was uncertain. In one member s view, the geopolitical risks to world growth had if anything increased somewhat, as reflected, for example, in the higher-than-expected dollar price of oil. Overall, most members concluded that the prospects for UK external demand in the near term were a little weaker, both on the month and relative to the August Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, data revisions had raised the estimate of the recent path of aggregate demand. But the impact of these revisions on inflation prospects would depend on the extent to which potential output too had been higher than previously thought. Some members thought that the net effect of the revisions would be to raise the Committee s projection of inflation, although by how much was uncertain; others were less confident, and thought that further analysis in the context of the preparation of the November Inflation Report would be necessary before conclusions could be safely drawn.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that house prices, housing market activity and mortgage borrowing all suggested that consumption growth would not moderate as quickly as previously expected. It seemed likely that the ratio of house prices to earnings would peak at a higher level than projected in August. The continuing rapid build-up of household indebtedness risked, in the view of some members, a larger and more abrupt increase in planned saving at some stage in the future, which would make it more difficult to meet the inflation target at that time. The outlook for investment was also uncertain. Some members argued that the corporate sector was stronger than previously believed, and noted the relative strength of UK equity prices; on one view, firms had less reason to defer investment because of financial weakness or uncertainty about UK recovery. Overall, the prospects for UK domestic demand appeared stronger, both on the month and relative to the August Inflation Report. Committee members also agreed that labour market activity had strengthened, which, together with factors such as the increase in National Insurance contributions, would tend to put upward pressure on private sector##NewPara##pay. However, unemployment had been low for some time without earnings growth having picked up. There was a range of views about whether it might do so in the near future by more or less than projected in August.##NewPara##It was noted that interest rates were below plausible estimates of the neutral rate, so the monetary policy stance was expansionary, and would remain so even if the repo rate were raised by  basis points.##NewPara##In the light of these considerations, some members concluded that, at the current level of interest rates, inflation was now clearly likely to be above target in two years  time, primarily because of higher domestic demand, and that an increase in the repo rate was appropriate this month.  It was in  their view not necessary to wait for a revised forecast. Some other members took the view that the reduction in rates in July had been warranted on precautionary grounds, because the balance of risks to inflation had then been on the downside. Since then, some of the major downside risks   for example, those associated with the pace of the US recovery   had diminished, and some upside risks   for example, to consumption from the housing market   had increased. Hence it was now appropriate to withdraw the precautionary stimulus.##NewPara##However, a majority of members were to varying degrees less confident that inflation would exceed the target in the medium term, or that the balance of risks had changed substantially.##NewPara##A premature rise in the repo rate might choke off the improvement in business conditions. Data revisions had had little impact on nominal GDP, and it was the ratio of nominal GDP to real aggregate supply that was most relevant for assessing inflationary pressure.  Further consideration of the complex questions raised by the revised UK data during the coming forecast round would help to clarify some important issues relating to the evolution of potential supply and the relationship between activity and inflation.##NewPara##The Governor invited members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. Five members (the Governor, Rachel Lomax, Charles Bean, Marian Bell and Richard Lambert) voted in favour. Four members (Andrew Large, Kate Barker, Stephen Nickell and Paul Tucker) voted against, preferring an increase in the repo rate of  basis points.