The external environment##NewPara##The Committee began by discussing recent developments in the world economy. These could be broadly grouped under three main headings. First, the prospects for world output and trade had deteriorated over the month and the prospects of lower world inflation and weaker commodity prices had improved; second, the Committee discussed the risks of a credit crunch; third, financial markets had been particularly volatile and there had been significant changes in equity prices, interest and exchange rates.##NewPara##Prospects for world output and trade##NewPara##The latest International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook (IMF WEO) projection was for world output growth of .% in  and .% in , while world trade volume was projected to grow by .% and .% respectively. These projections were much lower than published in May, and they implied a sharp slowdown from . There were considerable downside risks that world trade, and hence demand for UK exports, might be even weaker than the IMF was currently projecting for the rest of this year and .##NewPara##The outlook for activity in Japan had, if anything, deteriorated further since the September meeting, though the prospect of progress on banking reform seemed brighter and had been reflected in the level of the Nikkei.##NewPara##Turning to the emerging market economies, the situation in some of the worst affected countries remained difficult, but since the election on  October capital outflows from Brazil in particular appeared to have fallen. The implications of further adverse news in Latin America would be serious for the world economic outlook, both because of the size of these economies and their financial links with other emerging market and industrialised economies.##NewPara##The risk of a credit crunch##NewPara##The Russian default had led to a sea change in perceptions concerning the pricing of risk and the desire for liquidity. Spreads on emerging market debt were much higher than in the autumn of , and were close to the levels reached following the Mexican crisis in . Nonetheless, spreads on emerging market debt had fallen slightly during the month. There had been tentative signs that the financial fragility seen in the immediate aftermath of the Russian default might have been easing, but the problems at Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) had led to a further reassessment by financial markets. In the United States, concerns had emerged that the deterioration in confidence was spreading beyond the financial sector and impacting on credit conditions faced by the industrial and commercial sectors.##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, although corporate bond yields had actually fallen over the past year and over the past month, there had been a rise in the spread between the yield on corporate bonds and gilts since the previous meeting. Spreads were well above the level of a year ago, reflecting either an increased aversion to risk or a perception of greater risks. Bond issuance by UK companies would need to be monitored.##NewPara##The latest monetary data showed fairly strong growth in bank lending to the corporate sector in August, but it was too early for the most recent developments to be reflected in the published data. Looking back over a longer period, the growth of bank lending to the corporate sector had slowed and may have been related to a slowdown in demand rather than a reduction in supply. Anecdotal evidence suggested that there was no across-the-board tightening of terms for small- or medium-sized corporate customers or households, although over a longer period there had been adjustments for companies exposed to emerging market economies.##NewPara##Movements in financial markets##NewPara##The level of interest rates implied by the December short sterling contract had fallen around  basis points since the previous meeting, and  basis points since the high in mid-June. The fall implied by  contracts was greater still. Gilt yields had also fallen. The fall in UK nominal government bond yields looked particularly striking when compared to the much smaller change in the yield on index linked gilts. The Committee noted that this could reflect a genuine downward revision of implied forward expected inflation rates - which should be considered alongside a possible global revision of inflation expectations. But at least some of it probably reflected liquidity or  flight to quality  effects as portfolios were adjusted, and this part was likely to prove temporary.##NewPara##Against the backdrop of a weaker outlook for the demand for UK exports than thought at the time of the previous meeting, the Committee assessed the  % fall in the sterling effective exchange rate since the September meeting. (Sterling was around % below the assumption used in the August central projection.) It was difficult to gauge the implications for RPIX inflation without identifying the sources of the depreciation, although the fall in sterling against the Deutsche Mark seemed consistent with movements in market expectations of future domestic and foreign short-term interest rates. The implied fall in domestic short-term interest rate expectations and the depreciation of sterling suggested that markets anticipated some degree of monetary easing, which could be already affecting decisions by companies and households.##NewPara##The dollar had weakened over the past month against the Deutsche Mark and yen. The fall in US equity prices, and the US economy s exposure to the most heavily affected emerging market economies, might have led markets to anticipate a fall in US interest rates relative to other industrialised economies. This would be consistent with some depreciation of the dollar. The dollar fell markedly against the yen during the course of the meeting.##NewPara##The FT-SE All-Share index had fallen by about % since the September meeting, and was well below the July peak. The fall was particularly marked in the banking sector. The fall in the FT-SE over the past month had been more than that in the Dow Jones - though the movements in the two indices over the past year had been similar. A fall in equity wealth could have implications for permanent income and hence consumption, as well as the cost of capital and investment. Both would work in the direction of weakening the outlook for output and inflation, as would the recent moderation of house price inflation.##NewTopic##Activity and the revisions to the National Accounts##NewPara##The National Accounts had been revised since the previous meeting, following methodological changes, rebasing and incorporation of new data. Although the new headline measure of GDP growth at market prices was little changed in the first half of  compared with the previous estimate, growth in gross value added (formerly GDP at factor cost) was faster. The level of GDP on the headline measure had been revised up by just under % compared with the earlier estimates, and the average growth rate of GDP had been around .% higher since the start of the decade. The revision to investment suggested that capacity was also higher than previously thought. This made it difficult to judge whether the revised data suggested that output was higher relative to the economy s productive capacity than previously thought. That would need to be assessed in the preparation of the November Inflation Report. On balance, revisions to the National Accounts did not significantly alter the Committee s view of prospects for demand, output and inflation.##NewPara##Revisions to consumption suggested that growth had recently slowed more quickly than previously thought. But investment growth had been revised up, so that final domestic demand growth was only slightly lower through the second half of  and the first half of  than previously estimated. Even after revisions, the recent rise in inventories (stockbuilding) remained difficult to interpret. The Bank s regional agents had undertaken an informal survey which showed some signs of an undesired accumulation of inventories - especially in finished manufactures - and a desire to unwind those positions. There was a risk of a fall in inventories reducing GDP growth in the second half of , but it was difficult to quantify. The contribution from net trade to GDP growth had been revised up in the second quarter, though it had been erratic from quarter to quarter.##NewPara##The latest activity indicators for the third quarter appeared consistent with the August Inflation Report central projection. But looking forward, the prospects for demand and output seemed weaker than at the time of the previous meeting on account of both external and domestic news. The evidence from domestic consumer and business surveys was almost uniformly weak. The picture from the surveys was confirmed by the reports from the Bank s regional Agents which had shown a marked deterioration in business sentiment over recent months.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##There was evidence of continuing tightness in the labour market, with unemployment continuing to fall on both the LFS and claimant-count measures. Employment was still rising on the LFS measure, although hours worked had been flat. The lags between output and employment, and output growth having remained close to trend in the first half of the year, could explain why unemployment had continued to fall. Reports of recent job losses were likely to relate to the period after that covered by the latest data.##NewPara##The Committee then turned to the corrections to average earnings growth for May, June and July announced by the ONS on  October. At the time of the September meeting, the extent of the fall in annual earnings growth between May and June had been surprising, and the Committee had concluded that if subsequently confirmed by later data it would be good news about domestically generated inflationary pressure. However, the subsequent correction of these figures meant that the fall in earnings growth was less sharp. But there was considerable uncertainty about the reliability of official data on earnings growth. The correction related to the treatment of new firms included in the sample from April  onwards, which had lower levels of average earnings than the firms already in the sample. The number of new firms surveyed in some sectors appeared to be material. Even on the corrected data there remained a puzzle concerning the fall in the contribution from regular pay.##NewPara##Given the correction, and the fact that these figures were likely to change again on  October when the ONS released rebased estimates of the Average Earnings Index, the Committee felt more uncertain than usual about the interpretation of the earnings figures. The Committee also noted that there were no signs of a fall in settlements, which had continued to edge up on the##NewPara##twelve-month employment-weighted measure most directly comparable to the annual earnings growth figures.##NewTopic##The consequences for the Committee’s output and inflation projections##NewPara##Overall, the global outlook appeared weaker than it had a month ago, and the links from developments in emerging market economies to the industrial economies were becoming stronger and more apparent. In particular, recent developments raised the question of a credit crunch in the United States. There had been a flight to industrial countries  government debt from corporate debt, as well as from emerging market economies, with a resulting rise in spreads. The order of magnitude of the financial risks in the United States currently seemed greater than in the United Kingdom. It was not clear that the signs of financial fragility in global financial markets would persist. But even if signs of fragility dissipated, there could be significant effects on world activity from the fall in equity prices and the shifts in business and consumer confidence that had already occurred.##NewPara##While there had been significant news affecting the outlook for activity during the month, there was no clear message from data on prices and costs. Inflation had turned out broadly as expected at the time of the August Inflation Report, and had remained surprisingly stable over recent years despite large movements in the exchange rate and activity. There was uncertainty concerning the news in the corrected earnings data. Furthermore, the Committee had to take into account the causes and effect of the depreciation of sterling since the September meeting.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee noted that it could take account of the analysis and opinion of outside commentators, but had to reach its own assessment, in line with its remit.##NewPara##The Committee recognised that recent financial turbulence introduced new downside risks to the outlook for output in the industrial countries as a whole. That effect would be taken into account in the Committee s assessment of the prospects of hitting the inflation target in the United Kingdom. Moreover, an early reduction in UK interest rates might, following the easing of policy in the United States, help to reduce current turbulence in financial markets.##NewPara##Although there had been little news in the GDP revisions and latest monthly indicators, the domestic survey evidence, together with the weaker outlook for world activity, suggested that the prospects for UK activity had deteriorated. The Committee concluded that the slowdown in##NewPara##aggregate demand was likely to be greater, and more protracted, than thought at the time of the August Inflation Report. The extent of the deterioration was uncertain, and would need to be quantified in the context of the November forecast round. Some of the relevant factors - such as developments in credit markets - were particularly difficult to quantify. Looking forward, the expected sharper and more prolonged slowdown in aggregate demand, together with the latest price and cost data, had probably reduced or removed the  hump  in the central projection for inflation made in August, and increased the risk of inflation falling below the target of .% looking two years or so ahead.##NewPara##There was a tension between the ONS data, which showed the economy to be broadly on the track expected at the time of the August Inflation Report, and the weak survey data. It was difficult to know how much weight to place on the surveys.##NewPara##One argument was that more weight should be placed on the published data than the recent weakness in surveys - which might not persist. If some of the deterioration in sentiment concerning prospects for the world economy also proved to be overdone, the profile for UK inflation might not change significantly compared with the August Report central projection. On this view, the degree of monetary easing required at the present time was small, especially given the fall of sterling. But it was necessary to take into account market expectations of a loosening: taking no action might further dent confidence, thus increasing the downside risks to activity and inflation. These considerations pointed to an interest rate cut of  basis points.##NewPara##Another argument suggested that the case for an interest rate cut was clearer. The weakness in surveys during the past few months now seemed uniform, and the sharp deterioration in sentiment was confirmed by the Bank s regional Agencies. It was difficult to discount this evidence and together with the overseas news it could significantly change the outlook for inflation. At the same time there had also been some easing from the fall in the exchange rate and short-term real interest rate expectations. These arguments also suggested that a reduction in interest rates of  basis points was warranted. There were, as yet, no clear signs of a credit crunch in the UK, but if they emerged, a larger cut in rates might be required.##NewPara##On a further argument, the current conjuncture might warrant a larger cut in interest rates than  basis points. However, there had been a great deal of volatility in financial markets, and some of the current signs of financial fragility might dissipate. Moreover, it was difficult to form a##NewPara##quantitative view of how the deterioration in the world economy, GDP revisions, fall in sterling, earnings revisions and domestic survey evidence would affect the projection of inflation two years or so ahead. There was a risk that a large reduction in interest rates might have to be partly reversed. The best course, because of the uncertainties, was to cut interest rates by  basis points, and review the outlook in the context of the quarterly forecast round in November.##NewPara##On a fourth argument, the deterioration in prospects for UK output were such that a  basis point reduction in interest rates would be insufficient to stop a more substantial fall in output and rise in unemployment. Together with the likely further weakening of external prices, this would lead to inflation undershooting the target. Even without a credit crunch, the latest IMF WEO projections might seriously underestimate the extent of the slowdown in world trade and world growth. Therefore, the deterioration in the external demand for UK goods and services could be large. More weight could also be attached to the possibility of an inventory adjustment, and to tentative reports that domestic credit conditions were tightening. On this view the chances of a UK recession next year had substantially increased. The current level of real short-term interest##NewPara##rates was too high both domestically and in comparison with other G countries, and a reduction in interest rates of at least  basis points was required.##NewPara##The Governor invited members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be cut by  basis points to .% this month. Seven members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, David Clementi, Alan Budd, Charles Goodhart, Ian Plenderleith and John Vickers) voted for the proposition, and two (Willem Buiter and DeAnne Julius) voted against, preferring a larger cut in interest rates.