Recent developments in Asia and their implications##NewPara##Members agreed that the financial crisis in Asia would lead to a sharp contraction of domestic demand in the countries that were immediately affected. Their net exports would rise, and there would be downward pressure on their export prices and on world commodity prices. For countries that were not immediately affected there would be a weakening of external demand and a fall in import prices.##NewPara##In countries that were not immediately affected, the likely response to these developments would be to adopt an easier policy stance than otherwise, to strengthen domestic demand and offset the weakening of external demand. Such a response had been assumed in projections of the effects of the Asian crisis, and the fall in market interest rates in industrial countries suggested that market participants were anticipating such a response. It would involve accommodating higher than otherwise domestic demand growth for a period. External trade surpluses (eg in Continental European countries) would fall, and deficits (eg in the United States) would rise. The adverse effects of the crisis on global output would be larger if the countries not immediately affected were unwilling or unable to allow domestic demand to expand faster.##NewPara##There was a risk that countries not immediately affected would not respond in this way. For example some countries might think themselves too small to make any##NewPara##significant difference to the world economy, and others might be concerned that any policy easing would make them vulnerable to financial disturbance.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the likely scale of the effects. Recent external estimates were that the ex ante effect on GDP in industrial countries (ie before allowing for the effects of policy accommodation in the countries not immediately affected) might be of the order of .% of GDP in  - rather less in Europe and rather more in the United States and Japan. After allowing for policy accommodation, the residual effect would be substantially lower. The central projection in the February Inflation Report assumed that the impact of the Asian crisis would be to reduce the level of world GDP by up to  percentage point by the end of , and the level of GDP in the major six overseas economies by around half a percentage point. Those estimates reflected both direct and indirect effects, as well as the policy response in countries other than the United Kingdom. The impact on UK net exports was expected to be approaching half a percentage point of GDP during the next two years. Some members thought that an adverse affect on the United Kingdom of this size might easily be offset if, for example, demand in Continental Europe proved stronger than expected as the single currency approached. According to IMF projections published in December, the current account balances of the Asian countries immediately affected by the crisis might be around $ billion stronger in  than had been thought likely before the crisis, and it now seemed that the effect might be larger, with much of it coming initially from lower imports.##NewPara##Members discussed how the world economy might develop. They noted that business and consumer confidence in Japan were already very weak, partly on account of financial fragility, and discussed the possibility of further action to stimulate domestic demand in Japan. They also noted that domestic demand growth in Germany had been surprisingly slow. The US current account deficit would be affected by the Asian crisis and that could threaten to aggravate tensions over international trade over the next year or so. Members also noted that market interest rates at medium and longer maturities in countries not immediately affected had generally fallen, even though they would have larger current account deficits to finance.##NewPara##Members discussed the risk that the impact of the Asian crisis might be much more severe than recent estimates suggested. One possibility was that the crisis could spread as a result of financial contagion, but that risk seemed to have become smaller during the past month. Another possibility was that industrial confidence in the countries not immediately affected could be set back to a much greater extent than##NewPara##might be expected. It was suggested that the Gulf War had had such an effect in  and . The recent unexpected weakness of UK economic data such as GDP, manufacturing production and the external trade balance, together with the weakening of the CBI financial services survey and a number of profit warnings, were possible symptoms of such a confidence effect. A contrary indicator was the recent strength of the UK equity market. Members noted that the FT-SE  index contained a very large component which was dependent on overseas rather than UK earnings, and that in any case its recent strength owed much to projected mergers and acquisitions. The FT-SE  and Small Capitalisation indices, which were much more UK-dependent, had performed much less strongly recently. Members acknowledged that rising equity prices, whatever their origin, would add to wealth, and noted that the risk of a fall in equity prices was taken account of in the projection in the February Inflation Report.##NewTopic##The current state of the UK economy and risks to the outlook##NewPara##The Committee noted that the first estimate of GDP growth in  Q was .%. This figure, which was subject to revision, was lower than the central projection in the November Inflation Report by an unusually large margin. Moreover, the##NewPara##newly-available index of production for December was also weaker than expected. Members agreed that it was clear from the external trade figures that net exports had fallen sharply in  Q.##NewPara##A range of views was expressed on the trend in domestic demand, in particular consumer spending. Domestic demand had increased by .% in Q, compared with .% in Q and .% in Q, according to the ONS  current estimate, but consumer spending in Q had been restrained as a result of the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, and the unusually warm weather. Retail sales had bounced back in October after a weak September but had fallen in both November and December. There were two possible interpretations. One was that the slowdown in recorded retail sales was temporary, perhaps partly reflecting difficulties with seasonal adjustment   over the Christmas period. The other was that there had been a longer-lasting slowdown in retail sales growth: it was noted that consumer confidence had weakened in the latter part of .##NewPara##As to output, members agreed that there were clear signs of a slowdown in manufacturing. Industrial and manufacturing production had fallen in  Q. On their own, the latest industrial production data would imply a downward revision of perhaps .% to estimated GDP in Q. The latest manufacturing survey responses##NewPara##were generally weaker than earlier. A range of views was expressed about whether service sector activity was slowing down. According to the ONS data, output of services had slowed down modestly after mid-, but the CIPS survey suggested some modest acceleration in January.##NewPara##Members debated the current behaviour of total output in the light of recent data. One view was that it seemed possible that the economy had reached a turning point in output and demand earlier than had been expected, and that the near-term outlook for output was unusually uncertain. The recent large downside discrepancies between estimated outturns and earlier central projections represented evidence in support of that view. Members recalled that the statistics had been very slow to reveal the downturn in . Another view was that the behaviour of the economy was always highly irregular and that these discrepancies were not unusual. There was accordingly no reason to think that the near-term outlook for output was more uncertain than usual.##NewPara##Members expressed a range of views about the information content of the output data. One view was that they provided a valuable guide to the state of the economy and important information for policy purposes. Another view was that the problems of measuring output, particularly output of services, were so serious that it was difficult to place much reliance on the output figures and safer to base policy judgements on more firmly-based statistics, such as the labour market data.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the current state of the labour market. The earlier presentation by Bank staff (summarised in the Annex) had reported that labour demand remained strong, as measured by quantity indicators of employment and unemployment. The Agencies were reporting growing skill shortages and the British Chambers of Commerce survey for Q reported rising recruitment difficulties. But the CBI quarterly survey suggested that shortage of skilled labour had been slightly less widely cited as a factor likely to limit output in January than in October, and substantially less widely than in the late s.##NewPara##Members discussed earnings growth. One view was that the rise in underlying average earnings growth to .% in November might be temporary and related to annual bonus payments, as had been the case when average earnings growth increased in late . Another view was that these figures, along with the recent settlements data reported in the Annex, were clear signs of an acceleration in earnings.##NewPara##Members agreed that earnings growth depended on the difference between the current level of unemployment and the natural rate of unemployment, and that the natural rate was very uncertain and subject to change. Members suggested a number of reasons why it might have fallen, including deregulation, lower unionisation, the removal of obstacles to women working, the growing incidence of part-time work, and the adoption of new approaches to getting people off benefits. It was agreed that the impact of the last of these factors on the natural rate of unemployment depended on how many of those displaced from benefits became active in the labour market.##NewPara##Members discussed the timing relationship between output and the demand for labour. They agreed that the prospective downturn in output growth would affect the demand for labour, and thus the prospects for earnings, after some delay.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the current rate of inflation. RPIX inflation had been persistently at or above the  % target throughout  despite the temporary downward pressures resulting from sterling s appreciation. That suggested that the domestically generated components of inflation had been and remained substantially above  %. It was not straightforward either to calculate domestically generated inflation or to interpret the results - it was necessary, for example, to take account of the fact that domestic labour costs would be affected by changes in import prices - but it was possible to get an impression of domestically generated inflation fairly readily from available statistics. For example one estimate of the domestically-produced component of RPIY was rising at a rate of  %-% a year. Moreover private sector average earnings were rising at around % a year, compared with productivity growth which had averaged around % a year for a long period.##NewPara##It was suggested that an additional factor likely to put upward pressure on inflation was that sterling was overvalued in real terms, so that a real depreciation was to be expected. During the period of real depreciation, it was to be expected that RPIX inflation would be higher than domestically generated inflation. So it was very important to get domestically generated inflation down sufficiently to meet the target for RPIX inflation, and it was not clear that the necessary reduction could be achieved simply through compression of profit margins: unit labour cost growth would need to fall.##NewPara##Another view was that inflationary expectations were falling steadily. Producers were feeling significant pressures on margins and orders and in some cases were reconsidering their strategies. Leading indicators, fallible though they were, were##NewPara##pointing to a slowdown in output. This was not an environment in which inflation was likely to increase.##NewPara##The Committee took note of the developments in the monetary aggregates and in financial markets reported in the Annex. Members recognised that the cumulative effect of past broad money growth represented an upside risk to the projection. In financial markets, the possibility of the exchange rate depreciating faster than the rate implied by interest rate differentials represented an additional upside risk, but the possibility of a sharp fall in equity prices represented a downside risk.##NewTopic##Other forecasts of the UK economy##NewPara##Members noted that the average of outside forecasts of RPIX inflation in the year to  Q was .%, close to the central projection that would appear in the February Inflation Report. The Bank s forecast of output growth was slightly lower than the average of outside forecasts for  but slightly higher for . This meant that the central projection that would appear in the February Inflation Report would be close to the average of outside forecasts, whereas the November central projection had been an outlier.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee discussed its decision about interest rates.##NewPara##A number of arguments were put forward in favour of an immediate increase in interest rates. First, the rate of domestically generated inflation was well above  %, and RPIX inflation was being temporarily depressed by the one-off effect of a lower level of import and commodity prices. At the current level of interest rates, domestically generated inflation would not fall sufficiently fast to enable the inflation target to be hit. Second, the labour market had continued to tighten rapidly and there were clear signs of an acceleration in earnings. The risks to the outlook for earnings were mainly on the upside, notwithstanding the projected slowdown in activity. Third, with the current account of the balance of payments projected to move rapidly into deficit, the risks to the outlook for the exchange rate were mainly on the downside, implying an upside risk to inflation. Fourth, on some views the level of output was already above trend, implying upward pressure on inflation. As a result, the central projection for inflation to be published in the February Inflation Report, based on the assumption that official interest rates remained at .%, showed RPIX inflation below  % in the second half of  and the first half of , but rising to above the  % target in the first quarter of . The risks to the projection were predominantly on the upside. This represented the Committee s best view of the outlook, uncertain as it was, and it would be right to act on it by raising interest rates now.##NewPara##A number of arguments against an immediate rise were also put forward. First, there were now clear signs that the economy had slowed down. Although there were upside risks to the projection arising from the foreign exchange market, the labour market and the effects of past monetary growth, there were also downside risks from the possibility of weaker world activity following the Asian crisis and from the possibility of a marked fall in UK equity prices. Indicators other than the Inflation Report projection - for example some cyclical leading indicators -  suggested a gloomier outlook: on that view, and looking  - years ahead, the question was not whether to raise interest rates but whether to reduce them.  It was however too soon to contemplate a reduction: the data were not clear enough. Second, the projection was based on a range of assumptions about economic parameters that were highly uncertain. For example a small and plausible change in the assumption made about the growth rate of productive capacity during the current recovery would, other things being equal, bring the central projection of RPIX inflation down to slightly below  target in  Q. Compared with the uncertainties, the excess of the central##NewPara##projection of RPIX inflation in  Q above the  % target did not warrant a movement now.##NewPara##Three further arguments were put forward for delaying any rise in interest rates, even if a rise were necessary. First, it was argued that an immediate increase in interest rates would aggravate the downturn in output projected for ; an increase delayed for a few months, even if it had to be larger than .%, might have its main effect on output during the course of , when some acceleration of output was projected. Thus delaying a rise in interest rates could lead to a smoother output path.  Second, the central projection was for inflation to be below or close to target from mid- until late , so that a few months  delay might not entail a serious risk to the inflation target. Third, it was argued that an immediate increase in interest rates would raise the headline RPI, which could lead to higher pay settlements in the short term, even if not in the longer term.##NewPara##The Committee debated a further argument for waiting before making a decision to raise interest rates, namely the uncertainties surrounding the projection to be published in the February Inflation Report. Although the February projection was the MPC s best collective view of the outlook, the recent large discrepancies between the emerging output data and the November central projection suggested that it was possible that a much sharper downturn had begun than was envisaged in the current projection. The near-term uncertainties, including those resulting from the Asian crisis, were unusually large and mainly on the downside. Given those uncertainties, it was not possible to feel very confident about the outlook and it would not necessarily be right to draw policy conclusions mechanically from the projection. In these circumstances there was a case for delay so as to allow a judgement to be made later in the light of more information. If the downturn proved to be much sharper than currently expected, then an immediate increase in interest rates might have a larger negative effect on output than in other circumstances and would have to be quickly reversed. Such a reversal could impair confidence in the economy and damage the credibility of the MPC process at this stage of its development by creating confusion about monetary policy and by encouraging the mistaken impression that the Committee had been indifferent to the course of output. Such an outcome would be more damaging than if an increase in interest rates which proved to be necessary were delayed, so that a larger increase was needed later. There was thus a strong case for waiting to get a clearer impression of the extent of the slowdown in the economy before taking policy action.##NewPara##The arguments against waiting were, first, that the sheer degree of uncertainty did not represent a proper justification for delay. Uncertainty was a normal state of affairs in economic policy making and there was no particular reason to believe that uncertainty would be any less in a few months  time. Nor was there any reason to believe that the near-term uncertainties were concentrated on the downside. Second, failing to raise interest rates at a time when the central projection of inflation two years ahead was above the target would risk damaging the credibility of the MPC process. It could raise the expected rate of inflation, and thereby increase the output cost of achieving the inflation target. Third, even if it could be assumed that inflationary expectations were unaffected, delaying a necessary increase in interest rates, without making the delayed increase larger, would mean delaying the time at which the  inflation target would be achieved, though it would not affect the output cost of achieving the target. Fourth, if a necessary increase in interest rates were delayed, it would need to be larger when it took place if the inflation target were to be achieved on the same timetable, and the resulting output path would be less rather than more smooth. Fifth, it was argued that if an increase in interest rates that was widely acknowledged to be necessary were delayed, that could lead to an appreciation of the exchange rate and thus to weaker external demand, but there might be little immediate effect on domestic demand. If by contrast the increase were implemented without delay, it might not need to be so large and its immediate effect would be better balanced, in that it would fall proportionately more on domestic demand. Sixth, it was argued that delaying an increase would mean forgoing the opportunity to exert a necessary restraining influence on the current round of pay negotiations.##NewPara##The Governor invited members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be left unchanged this month. On the balance of the arguments set out in paragraphs -, four members of the Committee (the Governor,##NewPara##David Clementi, DeAnne Julius and Ian Plenderleith) voted for the proposition, and four (Alan Budd, Willem Buiter, Charles Goodhart and Mervyn King) voted against, preferring an immediate increase in interest rates. The Governor exercised his casting vote in favour of the proposition and the repo rate was thus left unchanged.