Demand and output##NewPara##In the latest National Accounts, the level of real GDP at market prices had been revised up by .% in  Q, with the GDP deflator lowered by almost as much. The revisions principally reflected higher figures for household consumption, following the Annual Retailing Inquiry. Most of the changes had been to growth in ; indeed real GDP in  Q was now .% higher than earlier estimated. The recent revisions showed quarterly growth peaking in  Q. The slowdown since then had been marginally more rapid than on the earlier data, but might not continue in Q.##NewPara##Upwards revisions to the level of GDP might imply greater pressure on capacity in the economy. However, since most of the changes dated back to , and in the absence of other indications of such pressure, it was also possible that the economy s capacity for non-inflationary growth was higher than previously believed, or that the short-run trade-off between output and inflation was more favourable than indicated by previous data. In practice it was difficult to distinguish between these hypotheses. In accounting terms, measured productivity had improved in line with the increase in estimated output, with the rather puzzling slowdown a couple of years ago now less apparent. Whether this suggested any improvement in trend productivity growth which could be extrapolated into the future was unclear.##NewPara##Estimates for GDP growth in  Q were unchanged, at .% on the quarter, with final domestic demand now thought to have grown by only .%, or by .% on a year earlier, compared with .% in the year to  Q. Quarterly growth in household consumption was still put at .% in Q, having been revised up in the previous quarter from .% to .%. The household saving ratio, at .% in Q, was now at its lowest level since  Q. Investment had been revised down sharply, to show a fall of more than % in Q. The latest figures for net trade continued to suggest a##NewPara##positive contribution to growth in Q, despite the strength of the exchange rate, while government consumption was now estimated to have fallen by .%.##NewPara##The fallback in investment was puzzling, although investment was an inherently volatile series, representing as it did the rate of change in the capital stock. Government and business investment had both fallen in Q, in particular in transport equipment, although manufacturing investment had risen somewhat for the second quarter in succession after a long period of decline. It was possible that the path of business investment in recent quarters had been influenced by a clustering of projects ahead of the new millennium. On the one hand, the share of investment in GDP had been abnormally high and might revert to more normal levels, especially given the continuing squeeze on margins and low profitability in some sectors. On the other hand, it was noted that the high share of investment might persist if, for example, the relative price of some capital goods   for instance information technology   continued to fall.##NewPara##Stockbuilding had been rather faster than expected in  Q, but the National Accounts estimates suggested it had fallen in manufacturing, in contrast to the results of a survey by the Bank s regional Agents. The picture was therefore confused, but in any case stockbuilding was a volatile series which was particularly prone to revision. In Q it also included a large (and negative) alignment adjustment, and it would be unwise to put too much weight on the data yet.##NewPara##The net trade picture remained puzzling, although export volume growth appeared to reflect the strength of demand in overseas markets. On the basis of data currently available, however, net trade seemed unlikely to make a positive contribution to GDP growth in  Q.##NewPara##Preliminary indicators for final domestic demand in Q suggested rather moderate growth, if not as low as in the previous quarter. Retail sales volumes in May had risen by less than expected and  were now  % up on a year earlier, compared with .% in January, when the pattern of spending might have been distorted by millennium-related effects. The CBI Distributive Trades Survey showed the balance on retail sales volumes falling from + in May to + in June, which was below its long-run average for the first time since October . Consumer confidence, as measured by the GfK survey, had also fallen back, although this might well reflect seasonal factors.##NewPara##Recent movement in asset prices might also lead to some moderation in consumption growth.##NewPara##In particular, most indices of house prices had decelerated by more than had been expected, with little if any increase in prices reported in the most recent months. The preliminary survey balance for house prices produced by the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) had fallen, on the basis of a % sample, from + in May to single figures in June, having been at + as recently as March. There were some signs that housing activity might be slowing, with the House Builders  Federation reporting that net reservations and site visits had fallen in May, in the latter case to the lowest level since August .##NewPara##Survey data for manufacturing output suggested a further slowing in growth. The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) survey had fallen to just above the  no change   level, and the output expectations balance was slightly lower in the June CBI survey. The Engineering Employers  Federation had reported a sharp fall in its output survey, with signs that growth was slowing in parts of the  new  economy. Nevertheless, manufacturing and industrial production data from the Office for National Statistics had been stronger than expected in May, with manufacturing output up .% on the month, and with energy output falling less than expected after April s strong rise. Both series were around % higher than a year earlier, despite sterling s strength over that period.##NewPara##There were some signs that growth might be moderating elsewhere in the economy, with the business activity index in the CIPS services survey having fallen, as had the CIPS new orders index for construction, although both remained well above the  level. The CBI/PriceWaterhouseCoopers measure of optimism in financial services was down sharply, from + in March to - in June. There were also reports from the Bank s regional Agents of a slowdown in business travel and road haulage, although financial services, IT and telecommunications remained robust.##NewPara##Public spending seemed likely to support growth over the medium term. The Treasury representative said that the government s three-year spending review would be concluded later in July, and the Committee would be briefed in detail on its contents ahead of its August meeting. At this point it was clear that current spending would grow within the  % envelope, and capital spending would rise to .% of GDP as announced in the Budget. There would be a switch away from Annually Managed Expenditure (reflecting lower unemployment and debt interest payments, as a result of lower market interest rates and the decision to use the mobile phone spectrum auction##NewPara##proceeds to reduce debt) and towards spending subject to Departmental Expenditure Limits. It was unclear how quickly, and to what extent, departmental underspends from earlier years would be reversed, which would slightly change the path of total spending within the Budget envelope.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that some slowing in domestic demand growth had been required; earlier rates had been unsustainable, especially since net trade could not continue to act as a drag on GDP growth for the indefinite future. Prospects for external demand now seemed rather stronger than they had at the time of the May Inflation Report, following the fall in sterling, and so the question was whether domestic demand growth would fall back faster than had been assumed in the Report. To date, the evidence of a slowdown in the underlying growth of consumption appeared more compelling than for investment, where the Q data might have been erratic.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##The Committee discussed the recent surprisingly benign labour market data. According to the Labour Force Survey (LFS), employment had increased by around , in the three months to April compared with the previous three months (although the increase was less in full-time equivalent terms, at around ,). Over the same period, LFS unemployment had fallen by##NewPara##. percentage points to .%; the claimant count measure was also lower. But despite this evidence of an apparently tightening labour market, the Average Earnings Index (AEI) showed earnings growth falling sharply, from .% to .% on the three-month  headline  basis, and from .% in the year to March to .% in the year to April.##NewPara##Much of the rise in employment was reflected in a reduction in the numbers of the long-term unemployed and a decline in the inactivity rate. Since  short-term unemployment rates had fallen from around % to %, while long-run unemployment had declined from nearly % to around  %. This might suggest that the various labour market reforms over this period had increased the supply of those available for work, allowing rather faster employment growth for any given rate of wage inflation. If this pool of labour should become depleted, however, and the short-run unemployment rate dropped steeply, there might be increased pressure on earnings growth. More generally, although changes in employment tended to lag changes in output, the present strength of employment did not suggest that employers expected a sharp slowdown in the economy.##NewPara##Not all of the quantity indicators for the labour market pointed in the same direction. The Workforce Jobs measure of employment had fallen in Q, but this was a more volatile series, and was based on a single day s sample. Total hours worked had risen in April, but over the past two years average hours worked had fallen by around % for those in full-time employment, pushing up estimates of the growth in productivity and pay per hour relative to the  per head  measures.##NewPara##The Bank s regional Agents reported little change in skill shortages over the past month, although these remained a concern to many employers. The Recruitment and Employment Confederation suggested that these shortages had intensified in June, but the NatWest SBRT quarterly Small Business Survey indicated an easing over the past two quarters, albeit from rather high levels, and other surveys suggested a largely unchanged picture.##NewPara##The AEI data showed an unexpectedly sharp slowing in earnings growth in April. In part this was due to bonus payments, which had reduced earnings by . percentage points in the year to April, but growth in regular pay had also slowed, from .% in the year to February to .% in April. The most recent data were consistent with the view that the pick-up in earnings around the end of the year might have been even more influenced by bonuses and millennium-related payments than had been thought at the time. The Committee had noted at its previous meetings that the rise in earnings around the year-end might well reflect temporary factors, and therefore needed to be treated with caution; so too did the latest figures. While there seemed to be some news in the recent data, which were lower than assumed in the May Inflation Report for  Q, and in all likelihood for Q, the Report had assumed that earnings growth would fall back quickly and have little impact on inflation two years out. Looking back over the past two years, there now appeared to have been two peaks in earnings growth which had since been reversed, giving a rather flatter picture for underlying earnings growth than the steady increase seen from  to .##NewPara##As usual, there were relatively few new pay settlements in May. There continued to be reports that the pay round this year might be more difficult with RPIX and, more particularly, RPI increasing more rapidly than last year, and the labour market remaining tight.   But as yet there was little   evidence of this in the twelve-month numbers, although on a three-month basis settlements were no longer below %.##NewPara##Productivity growth per head based on the Workforce Jobs numbers was now somewhat above its previous trend, at .%, with unit labour costs growing at just below %. But using LFS employment figures, growth in productivity per head was lower, at .%. The share of labour in national income had continued to rise, although this seemed to be flattening off a little and had not yet reached its early s peak.##NewTopic##Monetary and financial conditions##NewPara##Notes and coin had grown by  % in the year to June, with growth now clearly below the underlying -% range seen since November . The three-month annualised rate was a little lower, at just below %. Such a slowdown in narrow money growth could be consistent with a moderation in nominal retail sales growth.##NewPara##A rather different picture emerged from the figures for M lending. While household M had been weak in May, M lending to households had continued to grow by around % on a year earlier. Growth in both secured and unsecured borrowing had increased, with the number of mortgage approvals also higher over the month. As a result of the new set of National Accounts, estimates of mortgage equity withdrawal had been revised up to  . billion in Q, but total lending for consumption, which included unsecured lending as well as mortgage equity withdrawal, had nevertheless slowed since the second half of .##NewPara##Although there had been no further acceleration in household borrowing over the past few months, its continuing strength raised doubts about the extent of the slowdown in consumption. The financial balance for households was now in deficit, and at its lowest levels since the late s; gearing measures were, however, rather low, with income gearing reflecting relatively low interest rates and capital gearing the sharp increase in wealth in recent years. While household borrowing might increase if the economy slowed suddenly, this would usually be in response to higher unemployment;  distress borrowing  of this type did not seem to be significant at present. It was possible that some borrowing might have been on the basis of expected increases in wealth, either in equities or (more especially) housing, which might not now materialise; surveys on house prices and housing market activity increasingly suggested that the peak in growth had now passed.##NewPara##The Committee noted that since February, when it had last raised the repo rate, fixed-rate yields had fallen by around  basis points at five years, although longer yields, particularly on corporate paper, had moved by less. Similarly, while the repo rate had increased by  basis points since last August, rates on retail borrowing and deposits had typically risen much less. For mortgages, however, the standard variable rate had risen by almost as much as the repo rate.##NewPara##M lending to the private non-financial sector had also picked up in May, although much of this was to finance mobile phone spectrum auction payments. Some members noted that part of the borrowing might reflect pressures within the corporate sector, with evidence of greater dispersion than usual in company profitability and capital gearing, as set out in the June issue of the Bank s Financial Stability Review. The numbers needed to be looked at carefully; for instance where intangible assets were important, capital gearing measured on a market-value basis might be very different from that on a replacement-cost measure. To the extent that the differences in profitability reflected greater competition, and resources from less successful companies were absorbed by those which were more successful, the macroeconomic effects over the medium term should not be damaging. But over the shorter term there was a risk of greater fragility than was apparent from data for the corporate sector as a whole. While there was little sign yet of widespread corporate distress, the combination of heavy borrowing with low investment in the aggregate figures remained a puzzle.##NewPara##Sterling s exchange rate index had moved very little over the past month after its sharp fall in  May, which had taken it back to its levels of early November . Sterling remained relatively strong against the euro, but by recent standards was rather weak against the dollar.  The exchange rate index   at around    was now close to its average over the past three years, but remained well above the levels of -.##NewPara##Implied interest rates from forward curves suggested that the market expected higher official rates in the euro area, the United States and Japan later in . Official rates were now lower in the United Kingdom than the United States; this had not been the case for any length of time since . If rate expectations overseas changed vis- -vis the United Kingdom, this might lead to further movements in sterling. It was also possible that a sharp move in the euro against the dollar would  itself influence sterling s exchange rate index, with the size of the effect depending on how far sterling followed the dollar as opposed to the euro, and on the relative weightings of the dollar and the euro in the index.##NewPara##The Committee noted that sterling s exchange rate index was based on trade in manufactures, and that the euro had a weight in it four times that of the dollar. To some, this seemed somewhat overstated. Much of UK trade which was not invoiced in sterling was invoiced in dollars, and this might have some effect on import prices, if only in the short term. Earlier work by Bank staff had suggested that altering the weights to take account, for instance, of trade in services did not make a great difference to the index. The Committee agreed to look at these calculations again in the coming months.##NewPara##The impact of the lower exchange rate on RPIX depended in part on how much of the earlier appreciation had fed through into import and retail prices, and on how far this differed from the assumptions made in the May Inflation Report. To the extent that the market had correctly anticipated that the earlier rise in the exchange rate would be reversed rapidly, the feedthrough into prices might be less than otherwise. That said, non-oil commodity prices had risen sharply in sterling terms in May.##NewTopic##The international environment##NewPara##There was some evidence that the US economy was beginning to slow, on the basis of the non-farm payrolls data, retail sales and industrial confidence, as measured by the National##NewPara##Association of Purchasing Managers. Such a slowdown had long been expected, but growth in the United States seemed likely to remain relatively robust by historical standards, with core CPI inflation so far remaining subdued. The recovery in the euro area also appeared to be on track, with private sector forecasters now expecting growth of around  % this year, with the harmonised index of consumer prices rising by close to %.##NewPara##In Japan the Tankan survey had been, if anything, a little stronger than expected, with much speculation about when the zero interest rate policy might end. While a change in monetary policy, in Japan as elsewhere, inevitably brought with it the risks that markets would extrapolate any move unduly and hence react in an exaggerated fashion, the move when it came was unlikely to be a surprise. In any case, the direct effects on the United Kingdom would probably not be large, and would depend on the reaction of the yen to any change in interest rates.##NewPara##Among the emerging market economies there were signs that growth in industrial production had peaked, after a rapid recovery in several of these countries, but the level of output remained well above that of a year earlier.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##The oil price had stayed higher for longer than assumed in the May Inflation Report, averaging around $ per barrel in  Q, as against just over $ per barrel assumed in May. To the extent that the proceeds from higher oil prices were not spent by the producers, or by governments which enjoyed higher oil-related tax revenues, this would reduce demand, in a similar way to an increase in indirect taxes.##NewPara##The direct impact on RPIX was more obvious, with higher petrol prices contributing##NewPara##. percentage points to the annual inflation rate in May. While the outlook for oil prices remained uncertain, it was possible that recent announcements of increased production would lead to a fall in prices, although perhaps not to the levels assumed in the May Inflation Report.##NewPara##To the extent that higher oil prices had already fed through into retail prices, or would do so shortly, the effect might be to raise the short-term profile of RPIX inflation closer to target, while reducing pressure on prices further ahead. This might be more likely if the rise in oil prices indeed proved short-lived, although it was possible that there would nevertheless be second-round effects from higher oil prices, in which case the effects would be less benign.##NewPara##RPIX had risen by .% in the year to May. This included upwards effects from higher oil prices and house price inflation, and dampening effects from lower utilities prices and the exchange rate. Some members noted that some measures of core inflation were below actual inflation, suggesting that inflation would fall for a time. For example, the twelve-month change in RPIX excluding food, drink, tobacco, petroleum and other energy products had now fallen to .%. But it was unclear how much information about the prospects for inflation could be gleaned from such a disaggregation; the aggregate price level should not be affected in the medium term by relative shifts in its components.##NewPara##There was some evidence from the CBI Distributive Trades survey that downward pressures on retail prices had intensified, with the balance in  Q at  , as against + in  Q. By contrast, surveys of manufacturing and services prices by the British Chambers of Commerce suggested that output price pressures were much stronger in  Q than in  Q. It remained to be seen whether this pressure on margins would be sustained.##NewPara##As a result of higher oil prices and a weaker exchange rate, the Committee agreed that inflation over the rest of this year might move closer to the  % target than had seemed likely at the time of the May Inflation Report. If inflation over the medium term were likely to be above its target, rather higher inflation now might mean that the Committee had less time to wait before it needed to raise rates. But it was unclear whether the risks to inflation over the medium term were on the upside, or indeed whether higher-than-expected retail prices in the short term had significant implications for inflation further ahead.##NewTopic##Tactical considerations##NewPara##The Committee noted that there was very little expectation in the market of a change in the repo rate this month, and that neither the FOMC nor the European Central Bank was expected to move rates in the immediate future. Against that background, there was a risk that any change in UK rates would lead to a larger movement in interest rate expectations than would be warranted, with a corresponding effect on the exchange rate. While this might be a reason for leaving rates at %, it did not of itself preclude a change in rates this month if there were good reasons to move in terms of the outlook for inflation. As always, if rates were to be changed unexpectedly, it would be necessary to set out clearly the reasons for the Committee s decision.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that it was difficult to calibrate the effects of the recent slowdown in domestic demand on inflation prospects over the medium term. By comparison some felt that the effects of the weaker exchange rate and lower-than-expected average earnings would be easier to calibrate, although even in these cases it would be necessary to re-examine some of the assumptions made about the pass-through into prices over the medium term. The forthcoming forecast round provided an opportunity to assess the relative impacts of these developments in some detail, and the August Inflation Report a means of explaining how this analysis had influenced the views of the Committee.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee agreed that the news on the month was weaker than expected, with signs of a slowdown in domestic demand, for instance in retail sales and the housing market, and##NewPara##lower-than-expected, although possibly erratic, average earnings numbers. The question for some was rather whether the news in the two months since the May Inflation Report warranted an increase in interest rates to keep prospective inflation in line with the target over the medium term.##NewPara##Various arguments were advanced by members for leaving the repo rate unchanged at % this month. Many of the determinants of consumption (such as house prices and earnings) appeared to be slowing, while the buoyant borrowing figures for households and corporates, although they needed to be watched carefully, might not in the short run be a reliable guide to consumption or investment. Upwards revisions to the level of GDP, for a given rate of inflation, suggested to some members that the disinflationary forces in the economy might be rather greater than previously supposed. The slowdown in the housing market appeared broadly based, being reflected not just in the house price indices, but also in the more forward-looking RICS survey and in measures of activity at the start of the housing chain, such as site visits and net reservations. The average earnings figures were much lower than expected, even allowing for the erratic nature of the series, with little sign yet of much of an increase in pay settlements during a period in which they had been expected to come under upward pressure.##NewPara##So far as external influences were concerned, if oil prices fell from their recent peaks, this would, other things being equal, reduce inflation in the short term.  The fall in the exchange rate since May would tend to increase inflation, but to the extent that it represented a rather rapid reversal of a short-run spike it might have less of an effect, while the long-term negative impact on  investment decisions of sterling s appreciation since  may not yet have been fully felt. It also appeared to some that the current monetary policy stance was slightly contractionary and that this might no longer be appropriate; with nominal rates at %, given most current measures of inflationary expectations, real interest rates were  % or more. With little expectation of an immediate move in rates either here or in the UK s major trading partners, it was best to leave the   repo rate unchanged at % this month.##NewPara##For some other members, given the news since May, while there was no need to raise the repo rate this month, it might be necessary to raise rates later to keep prospective inflation on track. While there was some evidence of a slowdown in the growth of domestic demand and average earnings, the latter series remained erratic. Little weight had been placed on the acceleration in the AEI in previous months, and little should be placed on its deceleration; the labour market remained tight and, if anything, pay settlements were creeping up. The fall in investment was puzzling, especially given heavy borrowing by the corporate sector, and might prove temporary. Borrowing by households remained strong, which did not seem consistent with a sharp fall in consumption; nor did the recent pick-up in the growth of employment. Much of the apparent slowdown in domestic demand might represent an unwinding of end-year effects, which now appeared to have boosted retail sales, average earnings and investment, if only temporarily, by more than had previously been thought. Looking forward, given the likely increases in public spending over the next two years, private sector spending needed to slow further if the inflation target were to be met.##NewPara##The exchange rate had not fallen any further over the past month, but was % lower than in the Inflation Report.  This provided some much-needed relief for the externally-exposed sectors, and with it the prospect of a better-balanced economy but, taken by itself, it added to pressures on inflation in the medium term. As a result, for these members it was important that measures of domestic inflationary pressures fell back from their present levels of around % for the inflation target to be met.   While it now seemed rather more likely that domestic demand growth would slow,   it was less clear that this would be by more than assumed in the May Inflation Report, as it needed to be given the improved prospects for net trade. The August Inflation Report provided an opportunity to assess the extent of the slowdown in domestic demand (and the weakness of consumption and investment in relation to their underlying determinants) and weigh this against the effects of higher oil prices and lower sterling. While the position might have been more comfortable if rates had been raised a little higher earlier it was now best to wait until August for more news, and analysis, in the context of the Inflation Report. For these members too, the repo rate should stay at % this month.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.##NewPara##The Committee congratulated the Governor on his being made a Knight Grand Cross of the British Empire in the Birthday Honours List.