The Budget##NewPara##The Committee had been briefed by Treasury officials prior to its meeting on the broad shape of the forthcoming Budget s macroeconomic projections and public finances. The fiscal outturn for / was tighter than had been expected at the time of the Pre-Budget Report, but much of that tightening had already happened and was in the data. Essentially, the broad picture was one of both higher tax revenues and lower public spending. The Treasury s estimates were for the cyclically-adjusted Public Sector Net Borrowing Requirement for / to be almost % of GDP tighter than thought at the time of the November Pre-Budget Report, and looking forward that it would remain some  % to  % tighter over the next two fiscal years.##NewPara##The Budget s spending profile assumed that the current fiscal year s underspending would be made up in subsequent years, but spending was otherwise broadly unchanged as a share of GDP in aggregate terms since the Pre-Budget Report. There had, however, been some changes within the aggregate. In particular, lower social security spending   lower transfers to the household sector   was offset by higher government consumption spending. Since the marginal propensity to spend out of these transfers was likely to be quite high, the demand-weighted impact of these changes might be broadly offsetting.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the possible implications for inflation. Three factors were discussed. First, much of the tightening was already in the data. So the relationship between, for example, consumption and post-tax income was different from that expected at the time of the Pre-Budget Report, and would need to be re-examined in the next Inflation Report forecast round. Second, since the reasons for the rise in tax revenues were not well understood, it was possible that those higher revenues would not persist   statutory tax rates had not been raised. However, it was noted that the fiscal projections were, as usual, produced on the basis of cautious assumptions, for example that the ratio of VAT to consumption would fall somewhat over the period of the projections, albeit from a higher starting point. Third, it was possible that higher tax revenues##NewPara##indicated higher activity than currently recorded in the national accounts, rather than an increase in effective tax rates. The implications of this for inflation depended in part on whether any##NewPara##under-recording of output was matched by a commensurate under-estimate of potential output.##NewPara##Overall, the broad fiscal picture looked somewhat tighter than had seemed probable a month ago. The impact on future activity and inflation seemed to be fairly small, although that would, in part, depend on whether the Budget had any lasting effect on sterling s exchange rate. More analysis would be needed once the full details of the Budget were known.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##Prior to the recent release of  Q output and expenditure data, the picture had been one of a gradual slowing in the annual rate of growth of final domestic demand from around  % to around % -  %. The latest data showed that the rate was now back in the % -  % range at the end of , on account of upward revisions to both consumption and investment. Considered in this way there was less evidence that final domestic demand was slowing to a more sustainable pace. However, it was possible to analyse the data in a variety of different ways. For example, smoothing the data over two quarters still suggested a moderation in the rate of growth during . Furthermore, the growth rate of final domestic demand in the fourth quarter had been in line with the February Inflation Report central projection.##NewPara##There was a . percentage point negative contribution from net trade to GDP growth in Q, much larger than expected. This, in turn, had been offset by a stronger-than-expected contribution from inventories, so that total domestic demand growth was much stronger than expected. It was possible that these two factors were linked, as the increase in stocks might be import-intensive. In addition, some of the change in net trade on the quarter might be erratic. Nonetheless net trade looked weaker than had been previously thought and possibly reflected quicker or larger effects from the most recent appreciation of sterling, or a delayed response from the past appreciation of sterling. This suggested that even if the overall pace of output growth was as expected, the mix of aggregate demand   between domestic demand and net trade   now looked less benign than it had appeared a few months ago when the net trade contribution had for a while been positive.##NewPara##On inventories, it was possible that the increase might also prove to be erratic. It was still difficult to assess the size of the millennium effects. In addition, the change in manufacturing, wholesale and distribution stocks did not account for much of the aggregate change in inventories over the quarter. The increase was largely accounted for by  other  industries, which included the quarterly statistical alignment adjustment. The rise in stocks in these industries in Q might also be linked to the recent weakness of car registrations. If, for example, the number of car registrations##NewPara##eventually recovered to its former level, then the underlying picture for consumption would have been stronger (and inventories weaker) than recorded. The change in seasonal pattern following the change to new car registration practice last year also made comparisons difficult.##NewPara##Overall the latest indicators of demand and output gave a rather mixed picture, with some remaining strong and others weakening. Many of the strong indicators pointed to continuing buoyancy of domestic demand. In particular, real earnings growth had been strong and wealth continued to rise. The GfK consumer confidence index had fallen on the month, but this was as expected following its surge in January and the index remained close to the level it had been at throughout . The latest CBI Distributive Trades survey pointed to both a strong outturn for February and an expectation of a strong March. However, the Bank s regional Agents had detected a mixed retailing picture in February. In aggregate, retail sales growth had continued at broadly the same pace, but with some regions reporting stronger and others weaker growth.##NewPara##A number of indicators on the output side showed perhaps greater signs of a slowdown in the rate of growth, many reflecting the recent weakness in net trade. Industrial production had been weak in January and there had been small downward revisions to earlier quarters. The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) manufacturing activity index had fallen slightly in February and had therefore remained well below its level in Q   though it remained above the neutral  level. The OECD leading indicator for the UK had also turned lower.  It was possible that the recent weakness in some of the output indicators might slow income growth and, in turn, domestic demand. By way of contrast with weaker industrial production data, the latest CIPS services and construction indices had continued to show strong growth and the i survey had shown business optimism to be strong.##NewTopic##Money and asset prices##NewPara##Broad money was growing at the slowest annual rate of growth since July , when the monthly figures had first been published. In addition, the disaggregated data indicated that this month, unlike in recent months, Other Financial Corporations could not account for the reduction in the aggregate M growth rate. It was possible that some of the weakness in household and corporate deposits was accounted for by the unusual seasonal timing of tax payments which might prove temporary, and it would therefore be useful to see another month s data before drawing any conclusions. The large financial deficit of the corporate sector was another possible contributing factor.##NewPara##By contrast growth in lending remained strong. Household credit growth, in particular, was breaking records, with annual growth at % the highest since the early s. In the housing##NewPara##market, both the number and value of approvals for house purchase had fallen on the month, but there was uncertainty as to whether this was a stronger than normal seasonal effect around the##NewPara##year-end. Corporate borrowing also remained strong. There were few signs of significant financial stress in other indicators. While the latest evidence showed that the corporate sector financial deficit as a percentage of GDP was quite large by historical standards, the special survey conducted by the Bank s regional Agents had found little evidence of distress borrowing, and suggested that companies were borrowing to invest.##NewPara##Exchange rates between the dollar, euro and yen had been volatile over the past month. Although there were further signs of stronger activity in the euro area, there had been continued signs of even stronger activity in the United States, so it was perhaps not too surprising that the euro had remained weak. Some of the recent strength of the yen against the dollar might be related to year-end repatriation effects, which could prove temporary. It was perhaps surprising that sterling had not moved much over this period, despite large movements in other currencies. The sterling effective exchange rate index had risen a little compared with the time of the Committee s previous meeting, but was broadly in line with the assumption underpinning the central projection in the February Report. However, during the month sterling had reached its highest-ever level against the euro, and a seven-month low against the dollar. Looking over a longer period the risk premium on sterling relative to the euro might have fallen.##NewPara##If, as the Committee had discussed at a previous meeting, there was a positive correlation between the US stock market, corporate sector profitability and investment, and the dollar, then any fall in the US stock market might be associated with a weakening of the dollar. The Committee noted that while there had been a fall in the Dow Jones stock market index recently, the NASDAQ index had continued to rise, reflecting the weight and differential movement of new technology stocks. The difference between the performance of stocks in new and old sectors was striking, and was apparent in the UK and continental European indices too. The Committee also noted the change in the composition of the FTSE , which had led to the inclusion of a number of new IT companies.##NewPara##Regarding house prices, both the Halifax and Nationwide indexes showed growth of % in the year to February. The latest Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors survey indicated that the balance of estate agents reporting rising prices remained strongly positive in January. There were tentative signs that the rate of increase in some of the southern regions of the UK might be slowing slightly, offset by a corresponding rise in the rate of increase in other regions. As well as the fall in approvals around the turn of the year, there were also signs that the number of site visits and reservations might be falling. But these indicators might have been affected by the millennium, and it was too early to judge whether activity had in fact slowed. The Committee noted that the rate of##NewPara##increase in prices would have to slow substantially from current rates over the next two years if the projection in the February Inflation Report was to be met.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##There was little news in the data published on labour market quantities this month. The LFS data for employment were likely to be revised up in April, with revisions spread over a number of years. The implications for other data   such as productivity   were not clear.##NewPara##There had been a sharp rise in earnings growth in December. It was interesting that the rise in earnings growth was not restricted to the private service sector, as there had been a marked increase in manufacturing too.  There were two main questions.  First, how much weight should be placed on the December number in gauging the underlying growth rate? Second, what did it imply about the underlying determinants driving both costs and prices, and also consumption, and hence affecting the outlook for inflation?##NewPara##Some of the marked rise in annual earnings growth in December probably related to bonuses. But because of the change in the ONS s survey form early last year, it was not yet possible to get a clear view on the contribution from bonuses to the change in the annual rate of earnings growth. If it related to bonuses, it would be sensible to smooth the effects. Since it was possible that part of the bonuses related to millennium preparation and working, it was also possible that significant increases in earnings might be recorded for some months to come, and that consequently the annual rate of growth might not decline and even rise in January. One suggestion was that some of the payments might be millennium-related  loyalty  bonuses, which were negotiated some time ago when companies feared potentially large effects from the YK computer problems. If so, these payments might not be directly related to past profits, as in the case of more traditional bonuses, and hence would represent an additional cost to the firm, albeit a one-off cost. In any event, these bonuses would be paid to the household sector, but it was uncertain whether households would consume only the annuity value of the addition to their wealth. Even if they did,  saving  through purchases of consumer durables would add to aggregate demand. More information would be needed, but taken at face value the latest earnings data were higher than the starting point for earnings growth assumed in the February Inflation Report.##NewPara##The contrast between the level of US and UK nominal (and real) earnings growth was quite marked, especially given that recent rapid productivity growth might warrant higher real earnings growth in the United States, and the fact that the millennium effects on pay might have been expected in the US as well. Although UK productivity growth was rising, it was lower than in the US and seemed unlikely to explain the entire rise in earnings growth over recent months. The##NewPara##increase in UK earnings growth looked less dramatic when an adjustment was made for hours   growth in nominal earnings per hour had been flat, but at a fairly high level of around  %, for some time.##NewPara##In contrast to the earnings figures, the three-month AEI-weighted series for pay settlements had fallen slightly over the past month, so the latest settlements data could not account for the rise in earnings growth. The two series implied that there had been a further rise in pay drift, which would be consistent with higher bonuses and/or other factors. This measure of drift had been surprisingly strong over the late s relative to measured productivity growth. Companies continued to report that pay increases were warranted by productivity growth and profits, and that pay deals were often self-financing with unit costs kept in check.##NewPara##There were a number of ways in which to reconcile the apparent contradictions between what individual companies said and what was recorded in the earnings data. First, one possibility continued to be that both aggregate output and productivity were under-recorded. Although this probably had little implication for the output gap as the data for both supply and demand would be affected, there would be lower unit labour costs than currently recorded. However, for this to be significant the under-recording of the level of productivity would have to be increasing through time, which was unproven, but possible in the light of US experience. Second, it was possible that for some companies the falls in input prices over recent years had financed increases in labour costs. In that case, overall costs would rise or drift would fall (to the extent it was profit related) given that input prices were now rising. Another possibility was that a small increase in labour costs in each individual company had only a small effect on its total costs, since labour costs were generally a small fraction of most companies  total inputs. But this could aggregate to a large increase in costs, once intra-firm transactions were netted out and one looked at value added aggregated across the economy as a whole.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##The oil price had risen further since the Committee s previous meeting, and had touched##NewPara##$ per barrel. It was well above the profile that had been assumed in the February Inflation Report projections, though it was possible that it could still come down broadly in line with the forecast path. There was general uncertainty ahead of the next OPEC meeting in March.##NewPara##Manufacturing input prices were volatile from month-to-month, but seemed to be rising by around % at an annual rate. Weighted costs in manufacturing (for example, including labour costs, raw materials and other inputs) now seemed to be rising by around  % on an annual basis, and at some point might push up output prices unless a further downward squeeze in profit margins##NewPara##occurred. The current downward pressure on margins might also be leading to an increase in the corporate sector s financial deficit. Forward-looking price indicators of output price pressures   such as the CBI Industrial Trends survey   were still negative.##NewPara##The fall in RPIX inflation to .% in January was also associated with a further fall in HICP inflation to .%, the lowest since the series began and the lowest among all  EU countries. A large part of the widening of the wedge between the two series could be explained by differing treatments of housing and of car prices.##NewPara##The CBI Distributive Trades survey balance of prices had recently recorded its lowest level since the survey question began. However, the latest BRC shop price data showed a slight increase in February. Retail goods price inflation continued to fall and was now zero, and there had been a further increase in the rate of decline in the retail sales deflator in January. It was possible that the strong rise in retail sales volumes in January was related to greater discounting. By contrast, the rate of increase of retail services prices had increased to .% in January from .% in December.##NewPara##There was anecdotal evidence that some companies were able to offset some of the rise in input prices by savings made through the use of e-commerce. The recent developments to promote easier and cheaper household access to the Internet might, in the view of some members, lead to quicker and more significant effects from e-commerce than thought likely a month ago. But it was noted that in the US, where there was already low cost access to the Internet by households, the share of retail sales conducted over the Internet was currently only around .%.##NewTopic##The world economy##NewPara##Prospects for activity in the euro area seemed to be improving, and the latest indicators also pointed to slightly higher inflation. But the picture had not changed significantly over the past month. If activity were to strengthen more quickly that might underpin an appreciation of the euro from its current level.##NewPara##The latest US data had again been surprisingly strong. Chairman Greenspan s recent Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, together with the latest data, suggested that there was more concern about the balance of demand relative to potential supply. If this signalled either an earlier and/or a larger move in interest rates than previously expected, then it might increase the chances of a gradual slowing of activity growth. But there were no signs that the testimony had changed market expectations of where US interest rates would go, either in the near-term or further out. It was possible that a further month of strong data had heightened the risks of a bigger change in financial market expectations at some point.##NewTopic##Other forecasts of the UK economy##NewPara##The Committee briefly considered the differences between the February Inflation Report projections using market interest rates, and a range of recently published outside forecasts. The main differences seemed to be on inventories and on the price/earnings nexus. On inventories, the MPC s projection assumed a continuing decline in the stock-output ratio. This partly reflected a view that there might be further efficiency gains from the exploitation of information technology.##NewPara##Most other forecasters did not appear to assume a continuation of a downward trend in the stock-output ratio. Differences of view on the cyclical influences on inventories, and the unwinding of any millennium-related adjustments, might account for some of the difference in . There was no simple explanation for the differences that emerged on prices and earnings,##NewPara##which reflected a variety of different judgments. Other forecasts, however, seemed to embody a more benign short term trade-off between growth and inflation. The Committee would return to these issues in the normal course of the quarterly forecast round.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The Committee concluded that the timing of the Budget was not a constraint on their decision either this month or next.##NewPara##There had been a widespread expectation that the Committee would not change interest rates this month, although a further rise was still expected by the summer. The Committee agreed that a change in interest rates this month would come as a surprise to the market and would need to be explained carefully. That of itself should not be a constraint on individual members  decisions, but the Committee would need to take into account the prospective effects of any surprise to the markets.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##A variety of factors were identified which pointed to higher prospective inflation than a month ago, and to which members attached varying weights. First, the underlying pace of demand growth over recent quarters might be even stronger than initially thought, partly because it was against a backdrop of a tighter fiscal position than previously expected for /. Retail sales volumes in January had also been much stronger than expected and, taken together with some other demand indicators, supported the view that fast demand growth had continued into the first quarter of . In addition, the Committee s projection for domestic demand was below the average of outside forecasts for , albeit largely on account of a highly uncertain contribution from inventories.##NewPara##Second, the latest data implied a higher starting point for earnings growth than thought at the time of the Inflation Report. Third, the oil price had risen further and would, unless it reversed, put further upward pressure on world and domestic prices. In addition, there were significant imbalances in the economy, and these might have implications for aggregate demand and inflation. On net trade, the trend was probably somewhere between the strong Q/Q figures and the weaker Q data. Nonetheless, the balance between domestic demand and net trade looked at least as worrying as a month ago. The further deterioration in net trade should at some stage come to an end. But given the upward revisions over the past month to data for consumption and investment in the middle of last year, more might now need to be done to slow the pace of domestic demand growth.  A change in asset prices might bring about a re-balancing of the economy.  For example, at some point the exchange rate might depreciate, or there could be a fall in the stock market or slower house price inflation. Unless these adjustments occurred, it might be difficult to re-balance the economy.  But it was uncertain whether these adjustments would occur smoothly.  In the view of some members, that pointed to a greater need to restrain domestic demand growth now.##NewPara##For those members who attached significant weight to these factors, and especially for those whose February central projections for inflation were above target beyond the short-term, there was a case for a further rise in interest rates of  basis points. However, there were also reasons for waiting. First, it was possible that after a month some of the fog surrounding some recent data might have cleared. For example, there were tentative signs in some of the housing activity indicators that the market might be turning, although some of the recent weakening might be due to millennium effects.  But, given the possibility of stronger bonus-affected earnings data over the next few months, it was not clear that waiting would help to clarify the picture on nominal earnings growth. Second, it was not possible to do a full analysis of the Budget yet, so it might be prudent to wait before drawing a firm conclusion on the implications for inflation.  Third, a rise in interest rates this month would come as a surprise to the markets. The market expectation was that interest rates would not move this month, but would still rise by the summer. It was possible that an increase in rates now might be seen as implying a lower path for interest rates in the future. But a rise in interest rates risked pushing up the market s interest rate expectations and hence sterling   which would exacerbate the imbalances in the economy and push inflation further below target in the short run. Overall, the considerations for these members were very finely balanced between raising interest rates by  basis points this month and waiting to see more data and analysis. For these members, it was best to keep interest rates unchanged this month.##NewPara##For other members, the recent economic data did not suggest the need to change interest rates this month. Despite attaching some weight to the stronger economic data discussed above, there were data that pointed the other way. Again, different members placed different weights on these various factors. First, although the mix of stronger domestic demand and weaker net trade looked##NewPara##less benign than a month ago, there were no clear implications for aggregate demand and inflation as these factors were offsetting. Second, the batch of monthly indicators was mixed, and overall it was possible to view them as being mildly weaker rather than mildly stronger for demand and output. For example, some members attached greater weight to the recent weaker industrial production data and the manufacturing CIPS survey, which on this view were consistent with slowing output growth in line with the February central projection. Third, the Budget suggested a tighter fiscal stance than previously anticipated by households and companies. Fourth, there were downside risks to inflation, most notably of a sharp reversal in the recent rise in oil prices or a fall in the US stock market. Fifth, it made sense to wait and try to collect more information on the type and nature of bonuses that were helping to push up average earnings growth. Also, further analysis of the possible differential effects of settlements and drift on prices and consumption was needed. Sixth, a rate rise now, by driving the pound even higher, would aggravate the external imbalance and might increase the probability of a sudden fall in sterling that might thereby jeopardise the inflation target. Seventh, given that interest rates had increased by  basis points in four steps over the past six months, it was sensible to wait and see how the economy reacted, particularly, given the short-term profile for inflation.##NewPara##The Governor invited the members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.