Demand and output##NewPara##According to the latest estimate, GDP in Q had risen by .% on the quarter, after increasing by .% in Q. Much of the pick-up reflected rapid growth in the primary sectors of the economy, such as mining and utilities output, following a fall in Q; if these were excluded, growth in Q was at .%, close to the average quarterly growth rate for GDP over the past eighteen months. The National Institute of Economic and Social Research projected GDP growth of .% in the three months to August.##NewPara##The central projection in the August Inflation Report was for consumption growth to moderate from its recent rapid pace. In Q household consumption had grown by .%, after an increase of .% the previous quarter; this compared with an average quarterly growth rate of .% during . The question was whether consumption growth would continue to moderate over the forecast period to a little below its long-run average rate, in line with the Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##Retail sales had been flat in volume terms in July, which was consistent with some slowdown in consumption, although sales of clothing and footwear might have been affected by the weather. On a three-month basis volumes were around % higher than a year earlier, with growth rates having fallen steadily from the peak seen around the turn of the millennium. The CBI Distributive Trades Survey suggested a slowing in annual retail sales growth in August, and the three-month average balance had now fallen for the past four months, with a broadly similar picture shown by the British Retail Consortium retail sales monitor. But the Distributive Trades survey also reported a less negative balance for motor traders  sales volumes (although the improvement here might  prove temporary) and wholesalers  volumes were stronger than expected.##NewPara##Most indicators of housing market activity pointed to a moderation of growth in that sector in recent months. The number of particulars delivered and loan approvals had fallen in July, and the House Builders  Federation net reservations balance had reached its lowest level for almost five years. Net secured lending had also fallen sharply in July, although the Bank s first estimate of mortgage equity withdrawal in Q was for an increase to  . billion, from  . billion in the previous quarter. The latest Halifax and Nationwide house price indices, while continuing to show significant increases on a year earlier, were decelerating; indeed on these measures prices were virtually unchanged between April and August. The slowdown was sharper than had previously been expected, and was no longer confined to London and the South-East. Nevertheless, such a slowdown need not entail slower consumption growth in the near term, particularly if it were to take some time for past increases in housing wealth to feed through into household spending.##NewPara##In the services sector, evidence was more patchy, although services output had risen by .% in Q. Optimism in consumer services, as measured by the CBI/Deloitte and Touche survey, had fallen between May and August, but optimism in business and professional services had risen slightly; this was consistent with the continuing growth in business services reported by the Bank s regional Agents.##NewPara##The underlying determinants of consumption seemed on balance to be a little less buoyant than at the start of the year. Taking the average earnings numbers at face value, labour incomes now appeared to be growing less fast, even though employment growth was somewhat stronger. Both the GfK and MORI consumer confidence measures had risen in August, but were lower than at the start of the year. Household borrowing was still growing rapidly, but a little less fast than in previous months, and while equity prices were higher than a month ago, the growth in housing wealth had slowed.##NewPara##The other components of GDP in Q were rather mixed. Investment growth was relatively weak, after a fall in the previous quarter: while services investment had recovered a little and investment by general government had risen strongly, manufacturing investment had fallen back. Government consumption in Q had also grown rapidly, both in real and nominal terms, having earlier been surprisingly weak; such an acceleration in spending had been foreshadowed in the plans set out in the Budget, but the numbers were erratic and it was too soon to draw firm##NewPara##conclusions from them. The same applied to the estimates for stockbuilding, which included an alignment adjustment and which at present did not show any contribution to growth during the quarter. The net trade position was also little changed in Q, with export volumes aided by the rapid growth in world demand.##NewPara##Survey evidence from the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) was consistent with steady output growth across the economy. In manufacturing the output index was a little higher in August, and had remained above the  no change  level of  for the seventeenth month in a row, while the business activity index for services was also stronger, at .. There was little evidence from surveys that growth at this pace was leading to increasing pressure on prices. More generally, the buoyancy of government revenues suggested that activity remained quite strong.##NewPara##Manufacturing output and industrial production were both slightly lower in July, although on a three-month basis they showed growth over the previous three months of .% and .% respectively. Comparing the past three months with a year earlier, manufacturing production was up by .%, and industrial output by a little more, despite the lagged effects of sterling s earlier appreciation. The Bank s regional Agents had also reported a pick-up in manufacturing in recent months.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that some of the uncertainties surrounding the path of output in general, and consumption in particular, had reduced over the past month. In the view of some members, this was particularly so with regard to the upside risks, and in consequence these members now felt rather more confident that domestic demand growth would ease back in line with the projections in the August Inflation Report.##NewTopic##The world economy##NewPara##Activity in the world economy in Q now appeared to have been a little stronger than expected in the August Inflation Report, in part as a result of continued rapid growth in the United States. More recently there had been some rather weaker numbers for US non-farm payrolls, and in the National Association of Purchasing Managers survey. As a result, the probability of a  soft landing  in the United States seemed to have increased, with less risk of a more precipitous adjustment to##NewPara##activity but with perhaps rather slower growth than previously expected in the United States in the coming year.##NewPara##Elsewhere, the German IFO index had fallen for the second consecutive month, and was now % below its level in May, with the fall in the forward-looking element of the index particularly marked. In the past, falls of this magnitude in the overall index had presaged a slowdown in growth in Germany. Industrial production in Japan had declined, although it was still well above the levels of a year ago, and growth rates in the Asian emerging market economies had generally fallen back a little, after a very rapid recovery during .##NewPara##Over the past month oil prices had risen sharply, with the Brent one month future more than $ higher, at over $ per barrel. This would have a direct short-term effect on retail prices. Over the medium term, higher oil prices would tend to restrain demand, if it took the oil producers longer to spend their additional revenue than it took those whose real incomes were squeezed to reduce their expenditure. However, the energy intensity of output was now much less than it had been twenty or thirty years ago, and as a result the effects both on inflation and output would be correspondingly less than in the s. To date, there was little sign in most countries of any effects on wage demands from higher oil prices.##NewPara##The Committee noted that the prospects for the oil price might be rather clearer after the OPEC meeting on  September, but that demand for oil produced by OPEC was very sensitive to fluctuations in world activity, which had recently been growing faster than expected. If the oil price were no longer expected to fall back sharply, there might be an attempt to rebuild stocks, though this could put further upward pressure on prices in the short run. Over the longer term, if oil companies believed that prices would remain higher for longer, the production of oil from non- OPEC countries would also increase.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##M lending to the household sector was still growing at an annual rate of %, although within this figure secured lending had fallen sharply in July. Meanwhile M lending to private non-  financial companies (PNFCs) had accelerated dramatically, with the annual growth rate in July##NewPara##reaching   % compared with less than % in  Q, and with PNFC finance from other sources also growing quickly. Deposits made by PNFCs had risen rapidly earlier in the year, possibly related to tax changes which made it less attractive to hold surplus funds overseas, and this increase in corporate balance sheets was something of a puzzle. Although net debt did not appear that high as a percentage of capital stock measured at market values, at replacement cost the net debt ratio was above that of the early s.##NewPara##One possibility was that  distress  borrowing was increasing, but there was little evidence for this from the deposit figures. Another was that investment was buoyant, but this seemed difficult to square with the latest Q figures, although it was always possible that the investment numbers would be revised up. A third possibility was that although growth in investment had been sluggish so far in , the level of investment remained high by historic standards; companies might have funded higher investment initially out of internal funds and later, as investment remained buoyant, by borrowing. However, when measured at current prices the share of investment in GDP was not as high as when measured at constant prices, and for these purposes the current-price measure was the more relevant. Finally, it might be that companies were borrowing in order to invest overseas, and that some of this borrowing was held on deposit in the UK ahead of a prospective acquisition. All in all, the continuing combination of heavy corporate borrowing and low reported investment remained a puzzle.##NewPara##While sterling s exchange rate was little changed in effective terms over the past month, there had been some movement in the bilateral rates. In particular, sterling had fallen to a seven-year low against the US dollar, perhaps because the market was becoming increasingly convinced that the recent rapid productivity gains in the United States were sustainable, and that the US economy was now less likely to undergo a  hard landing . The US dollar had been stronger against a wide range of currencies over the past month, so the weakness of sterling against the dollar was unlikely to have arisen for UK-specific reasons. Sterling had meanwhile appreciated a little against the euro, which had fallen to new lows against the dollar. While sterling had in general not moved with the dollar against the euro in recent weeks, the evidence of a more fundamental delinking of sterling and the dollar remained inconclusive.##NewPara##To the extent that sterling s exchange rate index properly captured the relative importance of the United States and the euro area, the effects on trade flows of the recent movements in sterling (which had left the index broadly unchanged) should on balance be neutral. Firms which competed principally with US producers would benefit from the fall in sterling against the dollar, at the expense of those whose main competitors were from the euro area.##NewPara##Over the longer term, it was far from clear that an appreciation of the dollar against the euro would be sustained, given the size of the US current account deficit. But for as long as relative rates of return on capital in the United States appeared high, the United States would continue to attract capital from the rest of the world. In that sense the present position might be sustainable for some time to come.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Employment growth had picked up in Q, with the Labour Force Survey (LFS) measure up by .%, compared with .% in Q. The estimate of average hours worked was .% higher in Q and so, on the basis of that measure, whole-economy productivity growth on an hourly basis would be close to zero in that quarter. The increase in hours worked was consistent with signs that the  labour market was tightening further, although the series was volatile, with average hours still .% below the levels of a year ago.##NewPara##Unemployment continued to fall rather steadily on the claimant count basis, but had fallen more rapidly on the LFS measure, from .% of the labour force in Q to .% in Q. This partly reflected   in an accounting sense   a rise in male inactivity, but it was probably too soon to read anything significant into this.##NewPara##CIPS survey data suggested a slower pace of decline in manufacturing employment, and steady growth in services employment, although in this case the balance was below that for business activity in services. The most recent Recruitment and Employment Confederation survey and reports from the Bank s regional Agents both indicated widespread skill shortages, but it was unclear to what extent these problems were increasing across the economy as a whole.##NewPara##While the quantities data suggested that the labour market remained tight, and might be tightening further, there was little sign yet of this feeding through into higher nominal earnings.     The Average Earnings Index (AEI) showed another fall in earnings growth, from .% to .% on the three-month headline basis, and from .% in the year to May to .% in the year to June.   These figures were below those incorporated for Q in the August Inflation Report, but it remained to be seen how far they reflected one-off influences, and how far a continuing moderation in earnings growth.##NewPara##The recent slowdown in earnings growth was accounted for by a substantial negative contribution from bonuses, both in May and June, most notably in the private services sector, where earnings in June were only .% higher than a year ago, as against .% in manufacturing. In as much as this deceleration reflected pressure on profits, this was consistent with the stock market underperformance of the retail sector and reports from the Bank s regional Agents of subdued high street activity. Whole-economy regular pay, ie earnings excluding bonuses, had been growing at around   % a year since March.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the significance of these figures. Earlier in the year it had noted that millennium-related payments had pushed up earnings growth, and that as a result the figures needed to be interpreted with care. This was less of a problem now that the change of millennium was past, and in any case the main news was the surprisingly large fall in bonus payments; growth in regular pay was relatively stable. This could suggest welcome evidence of a more flexible wages structure. While some recovery in bonuses and thus AEI growth rates was quite likely, bonuses for many workers in  Q and  Q would not be as large as those paid around the turn of the millennium. This effect had been incorporated into the central projection of the August Inflation Report, but some members now thought it likely that over the next few quarters the AEI would   grow more slowly than had been assumed in the forecast.##NewPara##Despite the tightness of the labour market, nominal wage settlements had fallen back from close to % two years ago to around % now, during a period in which inflation as measured by the RPI (which included mortgage interest payments) had generally been very low. More recently RPI inflation had risen, and there were signs of a small pick-up in settlements when measured on a##NewPara##three-month basis, although this figure was susceptible to distortions from compositional and timing##NewPara##effects. Most firms still seemed able to achieve relatively low nominal settlements, and in many there was now no such thing as an annual settlement, with pay depending instead on the performance of the individual or of the division in which they worked.##NewPara##In real terms the position was more complex. The strength of the exchange rate and the weakness of most commodity prices during  and  had enabled the real consumption wage (deflated by the taxes and prices index) to rise by % in , compared with less than   % for the real product wage (measured using the GDP deflator). This gap had begun to narrow recently, but as import prices began to rise and the growth in the real consumption wage fell back towards % it remained to be seen whether pressure for higher nominal wages would increase, and whether unit labour costs would continue to moderate as in the Inflation Report projections.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##RPIX inflation had remained at .% in July, with increases in seasonal food prices offset by record monthly falls in the prices of clothing and footwear, reflecting greater discounting than normal in the July sales. Looking forward, the latest ONS advance estimate of RPIX, which was on this occasion available for the Committee s meeting, was for the inflation rate to fall in August. If so, this would be the seventeenth month in succession in which RPIX inflation had been below the .% target. Petrol prices had fallen in August, partly as a result of greater retail competition, but it was unclear whether such falls would persist if the oil price itself remained strong.##NewPara##Survey data were consistent with continuing subdued price pressures in the short term, despite the tightness of labour and product markets. The CBI Distributive Trades Survey showed a steep fall in the balance for average retail selling prices, from - in  Q to - in Q, and the  prices charged  measure in the CIPS services survey had also fallen. Inflation as measured by the GDP deflator had declined sharply in Q, to only .%, but this was subject to revision when new estimates for the National Accounts were produced.##NewPara##Views differed on the significance of the persistent undershoot of the inflation target. By historic standards RPIX inflation had been extremely stable in recent years, and had remained close to its .% target since the establishment of the Committee. It was in any case unrealistic to expect##NewPara##inflation outturns very near .% month after month, not least because of external shocks such as movements in oil and other import prices. Against this background the Committee should remain forward-looking and symmetric in its actions, aiming equally to avoid both overshoots and undershoots of the target, while acknowledging that it could do little to affect inflation over the very short term.##NewPara##There were various possible explanations for inflation having recently been slightly below target. Some members thought that the short-term relationship between growth and inflation had become more benign, for instance because of structural changes to the supply side of the economy. They pointed out that the Committee s inflation forecasts of two years ago had been above the actual outturns while its forecasts for growth had been below. Other members thought that the recent inflation numbers might simply reflect continuing downward pressure from weaker-than- anticipated import prices, with the exchange rate remaining stronger for longer than had been projected in earlier forecasts. The Committee would continue to look at the information contained in the most recent inflation outturns, and compare this with its forecasts, to see how far the comparison cast any light on how much weight to put on each of these explanations.##NewPara##The Committee noted that while inflation continued to run slightly below target, inflation expectations for  remained very stable, and appeared anchored close to the .% target, despite the sharp movements in the oil price and the exchange rate in recent months.##NewPara##Surveys and reports from the Bank s regional Agents suggested that downward competitive pressures on prices continued to intensify, for example in areas such as cars and petrol retailing. But stories of fierce competition in product markets were by no means new, and while the profit share in GDP had fallen back since , it was still close to its long-run average. As such, official and company accounts data provided little hard evidence yet of a structural reduction in margins on an economy-wide basis, although there was more evidence of a decline from surveys. For some members, the relative stability of the profit share suggested that the pressures on prices were being translated into pressure on nominal earnings on account of accompanying changes in the labour market, rather than a margins squeeze: if so an intensification of competition would be difficult to discern in reported profits.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Most members felt that there had been little news on balance over the month. Oil prices were higher than expected, and the AEI lower, but it was possible that movements in both would prove to be erratic.  For this reason, the considerations underlying the immediate policy decision were similar to those the previous month, and for some members the position remained finely balanced.##NewPara##On one view, the repo rate should be maintained at % this month. Various arguments were identified for so doing, to which different members attached different weights. First, there were now more signs that domestic demand growth in general, and consumption growth in particular, might indeed be moderating in line with the central projection in the August Inflation Report. Housing wealth and nominal earnings were both slowing rather faster than assumed there; most other housing market indicators (such as secured lending, net reservations and particulars delivered) were consistent with such a slowdown, as were retail sales, although the corporate borrowing figures were a puzzle. Second, higher oil prices would tend to raise RPIX inflation in the short term, but it was questionable whether policy should react to any pick-up in inflation which was due solely to higher oil prices, particularly in the present conjuncture where this was likely to push RPIX inflation closer to target. In the longer term the oil price might fall back in line with market expectations, and if it did not it would tend to dampen domestic demand both here and abroad. Third, the prospects for the world economy might now be a little less buoyant than had been the case a month ago. Fourth, the latest figures for quantities and prices in the labour market   while very far from conclusive   suggested to some members that the rate of unemployment at which inflation tended to increase might have fallen, or at any rate that this was sufficiently uncertain for rates to be left on hold while the recent pattern of continued employment growth and moderate wage pressure persisted. Fifth, not only had some measures of inflation come in lower than expected, but some survey-based measures of price pressures continued to fall. Sixth, a rise in rates now, at a time when the euro was weak, might strengthen the perceived link between sterling and the dollar in an unhelpful way. Seventh, for some there remained upside risks from higher import prices and buoyant growth in some parts of the economy. But given the present benign picture on earnings and retail price inflation there was still time to react to inflationary pressures later;  the risks to waiting were not great.##NewPara##On a second view, the balance of risks pointed to the need for a further small increase in interest rates soon. Given that there were no pressing reasons to postpone such a move, an immediate increase of  basis points in the repo rate was warranted. On this view, while consumption growth had slowed from the rapid rates recorded during , it was unclear whether it would moderate further, as was implied by the central projection in the August Inflation Report. The housing market had clearly slowed, but household borrowing remained buoyant, and borrowing by non-financial companies had risen rapidly, perhaps foreshadowing some recovery in business investment.  Increases in public spending now seemed to be beginning to be reflected in the National Accounts data, and employment had risen rapidly in Q, both in terms of heads and hours. There were therefore upside risks to output both in the short and medium term, even if net trade were to act as a drag on growth throughout the next two years, as had been forecast. The labour market was tight. Recent AEI figures had been lower than expected, but they perhaps reflected transitory movements in bonuses. Moreover, until recently real consumption wages had been growing at around % a year, and the August central projection in the Inflation Report already incorporated a substantial fall in the growth of unit labour costs. There was little evidence for a marked structural shift in economy-wide margins, and whole-economy productivity growth had yet to strengthen significantly. Although oil prices might well fall back, they had remained stronger for longer than had been expected, and with sterling s exchange rate weaker since May, RPIX inflation would begin to rise above target unless domestically-generated inflation fell back to offset the effect of higher import prices. The risks were still that it might not do so sufficiently quickly to meet the inflation target in the medium term.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be maintained at .%. Five members of the Committee (the Governor, Christopher Allsopp, DeAnne Julius, Ian Plenderleith and Sushil Wadhwani) voted for the proposition. Mervyn King, David Clementi, Stephen Nickell and John Vickers voted against, preferring a rise in rates of##NewPara##Finally, the Governor expressed his gratitude to John Vickers not only for his contribution to the Committee s discussion and decisions, but also for all he had done as Chief Economist and Executive Director of the Bank. On behalf of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Treasury##NewPara##representative also expressed his thanks for the contribution John Vickers had made to enhancing the credibility of the Committee, and thereby the institutional framework of UK monetary policy.