The world economy##NewPara##The latest estimates of growth in the euro area had been broadly in line with the Committee s forecast. In the United States, there had been a rise in consumer confidence in May. Non-farm payrolls had risen in May, although this may be a temporary effect because the rise was entirely accounted for by an increase in the number of those working on the national census. The unemployment rate had risen by . percentage points in May. There had also been a rise in equity prices over the past month. But the purchasing managers  index in April and the latest data on retail sales seemed to be a little weaker. Developments on prices and costs appeared more benign than in recent months. The reaction of some analysts, and in press reports, to the latest US data seemed quite marked and was perhaps a little surprising in the light of these mixed indicators. Commentators no longer expected a sharp rise in interest rates   and this could explain why equity prices had risen.##NewPara##But the latest indicators might be interpreted as suggesting that the US economy was returning to the previous pattern of strong demand growth and benign price pressures. The imbalances in the US economy   for example between domestic demand and net trade   remained, and so the question was still whether the economy would experience a  soft  or  hard  landing.##NewPara##Since the previous meeting, the OECD had published its latest forecasts. These projections were for slightly stronger growth overall in the G compared with the December projections. The broad picture was for stronger growth in  and slightly weaker growth in  than the Committee had assumed in producing the May Inflation Report projections. But these differences were not particularly large. However, the latest OECD projections of slower growth in  than in  did##NewPara##highlight the broader question of whether  would prove to be the peak in world growth during the current cycle. Over the past six months there had been significant monetary policy tightening in a number of countries, and that might support a view that world growth would slow. Looking at financial market conditions more generally, there had been a rise in shorter-dated bond yields in many of the major industrial countries, although not the US, and equity prices had fallen somewhat since the peaks reached in the first quarter. Of course, it was possible that a rise in bond yields reflected market expectations of higher inflation, rather than a view that monetary authorities would tighten real interest rates more than previously thought. There were also signs that growth was slowing in various countries in Asia, and any further tightening by the US Federal Reserve was likely to have some effect on many developing economies, especially in Latin America.##NewPara##The oil price had risen over the past month, but this did not seem primarily to reflect a stronger world demand picture. The Committee noted that there was an OPEC meeting towards the end of June. The rise in oil prices would put some upward pressure on UK inflation in the near term, relative to what had been assumed in preparing the May Inflation Report projections.##NewTopic##The exchange rate##NewPara##The sterling effective exchange rate had fallen by around % compared with the profile assumed in the May Inflation Report, which used a  day average as its starting point. Since the time of the May meeting, there had been a larger fall of more than  %, reversing the rise in sterling over the previous six months. Apart from the period when sterling left the Exchange Rate Mechanism in , it was the largest one-month change in the ERI since .  It was noted that the risks of a large or rapid depreciation in the exchange rate had been explicitly recognised, but not been built into the May fan chart projections.##NewPara##Staff analysis suggested that the size of the depreciation over the month could not be accounted for by a change in interest rate differentials. The markets now expected no change in UK interest rates this month and there remained some expectation of interest rate increases in the euro area and in the United States. Looking along the yield curve as a whole however suggested that there was little monetary news over the month. It was possible that the decision not to raise interest rates in May would have lowered short-run interest rate expectations, but that this might have been masked because the large fall in sterling led to expectations of higher interest rates further out. Large##NewPara##transactions related to mergers and acquisitions could have pushed sterling down at least temporarily on the day of the MPC decision, and the no change decision might have triggered further##NewPara##momentum-based sales, which might account for the size of the depreciation.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that there could be no mechanical link between changes in the exchange rate and the decision on interest rates. The exchange rate change had to be taken into account, however, when assessing the prospects for inflation. Calibrating the magnitude of what appeared to be a real exchange rate depreciation on inflation over the next two years was difficult, just as it had been difficult to calibrate the effects of sterling s earlier appreciation. To the extent that the earlier rise in the exchange rate had not yet fed through to domestic prices, the recent fall might likewise have correspondingly less effect on prices.##NewPara##In its May projections the Committee had taken into account the rise in the exchange rate and had assumed that the pass-through to retail prices would be somewhat slower than its historical average   although the eventual effect on the price level would be the same. There was great uncertainty about this, but applying the same procedure to the recent fall would on the face of it imply a rise in the inflation projection two years ahead on account of the exchange rate shift   of around half of a percentage point compared with the May Report projections. If the comparison was with the level of the exchange rate immediately prior to the Committee s May meeting rather than the  day average used in the forecast then the impact on future inflation would be correspondingly larger. However, these estimates were extremely sensitive to the assumptions made and it was possible that the effect on inflation would be smaller or larger than this. In particular it was suggested that, given the depreciation, the Committee might review the assumptions earlier made on overseas exporters  margins to the UK, and on retail margins in the UK. Some members thought that the recent depreciation was likely to have a smaller effect on prospective inflation, since overseas producers  margins to the UK might fall back faster than had previously been assumed. These issues would be reviewed in the August Inflation Report round.##NewTopic##Money and asset prices##NewPara##Both the Halifax and Nationwide measures of house prices had fallen by .% in May, and suggested that house price inflation was slowing at least as rapidly as had been assumed in the Inflation Report projections. This reduced the risk that domestic demand would grow faster than had##NewPara##been built into the central projection. The latest provisional Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors  (RICS) survey pointed to a further reduction in the balance of estate agents reporting price increases in May, although the balance remained strongly positive. The recent pattern of slower growth in southern regions relative to the north had continued, in contrast with the picture a few months ago.##NewPara##The mortgage approvals data had weakened in April. However, the figures might be affected by the number of working days in April and, therefore, the fall might be reversed in May, just as the weakness in December had been reversed in January. The House Builders  Federation survey of site visits and reservations still pointed to a slight fall in particulars delivered later in the year. The provisional estimate of mortgage equity withdrawal for Q was weaker than in Q, and was consistent with some slowdown in consumption growth.##NewPara##Corporate borrowing growth had again been strong, but it was unclear quite why this was so. One possibility was that it reflected a shift between sources of financing, away from bonds and equities towards bank lending. Another possibility was that the higher borrowing could also reflect a squeeze on profits and hence a tighter liquidity position. Profits had fallen in the first quarter according to the preliminary estimate by the Office for National Statistics (ONS). A fall in final demand, and hence company income, could be consistent with a rise in stocks   but the relationship between the stock-output ratio and corporate borrowing had not been particularly close over recent quarters. In addition, the recent special survey by the Bank s regional Agents had found little evidence of higher borrowing because of worse cash flow. A third possibility was that higher borrowing was being used to finance current or prospective investment. Although total investment had been a little weaker than expected in Q, business investment had grown quite strongly.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##Final domestic demand in Q had been weaker than expected at the time of the Report. The annualised six month growth rate was now running at around  % compared with about  % at the same time last year   a significant slowdown but still robust. The weakness was broadly based across consumption, investment and government spending. The key question was how persistent the slowdown in the Q figures would prove to be.##NewPara##In the case of consumption, the Q figures looked a little low in the light of the retail sales data and other indicators, although the continuing weakness of car registrations through Q might explain part of the difference between retail sales and total consumption growth. At some point household spending on vehicles would recover, and hence the current growth rate might be erratically low.##NewPara##More recently, retail sales had been weak in April. But the latest CBI distributive trades survey and evidence from the British Retail Consortium suggested that retail sales in May would be stronger.##NewPara##The Bank s regional Agents  contacts reported early signs of an easing in retail sales growth while consumer services growth remained strong. Both the GfK and MORI consumer confidence indicators had risen slightly   though they were not far from their long run averages once seasonal factors were taken into account. Although slower house price growth and recent movements in equity prices suggested a prospective weaker contribution from household wealth to consumption growth than had been the case over the past few years, this had already been incorporated into the Committee s projections. Real earnings growth continued to support consumption growth.##NewPara##On government spending, some weakness in the first quarter had been expected in the light of recent monthly data, and a return to positive growth would be needed if Government spending plans were to be met. There had, more generally, been some recent revisions to the fiscal numbers, with spending having undershot and revenue having overshot the projections made in the March Budget. More revisions to the estimates of real and nominal government spending were possible when the National Accounts are published on  June. The revised data and any possible implications for future government spending and revenue projections would need to be incorporated into the August Inflation Report forecast.##NewPara##Inventories had made a much stronger than expected contribution to GDP growth in Q, and this had been broadly spread across the manufacturing, wholesale and distribution sectors.  It could reflect weaker-than-expected demand and indicate weaker output growth ahead, but it was too early to say. There were no signs of widespread stockbuilding from either the Agents  contacts or surveys. No details of the alignment adjustments had yet been published by the ONS, but it was possible that these adjustments, or other temporary factors, were contributing to a stronger contribution from inventories in Q. If so, the positive contribution might well be reversed in Q, with little consequence for output growth in the first half of the year as a whole.##NewPara##The positive contribution from net trade to GDP growth was only slightly weaker than expected in Q, although both export and import volumes had been stronger than expected. There seemed to be little news on the month and the puzzle remained of why net trade was so strong given the previous strength of sterling. The quarterly figures were nonetheless volatile from quarter to quarter, so that caution was needed in placing weight on the Q figures.##NewPara##The picture for GDP growth was further complicated by the weakness of energy output in the first quarter, which may have reflected the weather. This suggested that the underlying pace of output growth was stronger than recorded in headline GDP growth. The industrial production numbers for April showed manufacturing moving broadly in line with expectations, but there had been a sharp rise in energy output. That seemed consistent with stronger Q GDP growth, all other things being equal.##NewPara##There were significant discrepancies between the estimated Q growth rates of the output, income and expenditure measures of GDP, which were difficult to reconcile. The release of the National Accounts for Q and the annual rebalancing exercise for the ONS Blue Book might help resolve this.##NewPara##Overall, the pace of final domestic demand had slowed more than expected in Q, but it was too early to judge whether this would be sustained into Q.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##There had been a slight moderation in employment growth, and it seemed likely that average hours worked had fallen in the first quarter. But other data pointed to a slight tightening in labour market conditions. The Recruitment and Employment Confederation survey had shown an intensification of labour market shortages. While the Labour Force Survey measure of unemployment had been unchanged, there had been a further fall in the claimant count measure.##NewPara##There had been a slight pick up in pay settlements, with the three-month mean measure rising to .% in April. The twelve-month mean measure had, however, continued to fall and was now at .%. Average earnings growth had fallen back to .% in March on the headline measure, and was below the figure for Q in the May Inflation Report central projection. If the fall persisted it might##NewPara##imply a slightly lower profile for earnings growth and hence a slightly lower central projection for inflation over the next two years. At the least, it appeared that the upside risks to the May projection had diminished. However, taken at face value, the latest hours data implied that hourly earnings were rising even more rapidly in Q, by around  % at an annual rate, although it was recognised that this calculation was particularly subject to considerable measurement error.##NewPara##Productivity growth had been rising, and the annual rate of growth of output per head had probably risen to around  % in Q, while the estimate of growth in productivity per hour was around %. This month s special survey by the Bank s regional Agents suggested that many companies planned to purchase and sell on the internet over the next few years, and this might support future productivity growth.##NewPara##The real product wage (on the basis of the GDP deflator) was growing at around  % and was currently above estimates of average historical productivity growth. Whole economy unit labour costs had been rising by around % per annum, and were rising in real terms. This entailed a continuing squeeze on the profit share of GDP over recent years, which was unsustainable in the long run. On these measures the labour market continued to look tight. One way in which the tension could be resolved would be a continued fall in earnings growth.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##RPIX inflation had fallen to .%, consistent with the central projection in the May Inflation Report. The gap between goods and services inflation had narrowed, primarily due to the reductions in utility prices and the timing of duty increases on goods. The latest Bank estimates suggested that there had been a further squeeze on both manufacturing and retail margins. That was supported by the Bank s regional Agents  contacts reporting that they were still having difficulty passing through rises in input costs to their output prices. In the case of manufacturing, in particular, the squeeze on margins was reported as having increased the pressures on firms to raise productivity growth over recent quarters.##NewPara##The short-term outlook was for rather higher RPIX inflation than at the time of the Inflation Report. This was partly on account of the rise in the oil price, but this had no obvious implications for the medium term projections. But the main news on the month had been the sharp fall in the##NewPara##exchange rate, which would tend to push inflation back up towards the  % target faster than had been expected in May.##NewPara##The British Retail Consortium s shop price index showed retail prices falling .% in the year to May. The CBI Distributive Trades survey quarterly questions on reported and expected movements in retail prices also showed a marked decline in the balances between February and May, and the level of the balances was now at a record low. However, these indicators primarily related to retail goods price inflation, which continued to be much weaker than that for services. The latest Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) services survey indicated a sharp rise in the price index in May. But since the CIPS services survey primarily reflected business-to-business transactions, such strength might take some time to feed through to retail prices.##NewTopic##Tactical considerations##NewPara##There was little expectation in financial markets that the Committee would raise interest rates this month, although there was still an expectation of higher rates in the future. So a decision to raise interest rates this month would come as a surprise to the markets and might change expectations. In such circumstances it would be necessary to consider possible effects on the exchange rate and hence the likely consequences for inflation in the medium term.##NewPara##Previously when the markets had been surprised by a change in interest rates, there had sometimes been a marked change in the exchange rate in the weeks that followed. This might suggest that the exchange rate would appreciate significantly even in response to a  basis point rise in interest rates this month. But, in these past examples, it was difficult to isolate the effects of the interest rate decision from the flow of other news affecting market perceptions. It also mattered what market expectations were concerning the decisions at the next ECB and FOMC meetings. If one, or both, surprised the market by raising interest rates more than expected, and UK interest rates were not changed this month, then sterling might depreciate further.##NewTopic##The overall conjuncture##NewPara##An important question was how far the evidence over the month suggested that a rebalancing of the economy was in prospect. There were signs of slowing domestic demand and stronger net trade##NewPara##in the first quarter. There was also the prospect of somewhat stronger net trade in the future given the depreciation of sterling over the past month. So the depreciation of sterling from an unsustainable level was welcome. The important issue for the Committee was what this past and prospective rebalancing of the economy implied for inflation over the next two years or so. How large an effect on inflation would be caused by the exchange rate depreciation? This was especially difficult to know given the uncertainty in gauging pressures on profit margins. Were the signs of slower domestic demand and lower earnings growth sufficient to indicate that domestic inflationary pressures were weaker than previously thought?##NewPara##The effects of real exchange rate changes would typically first be seen on prices and only later on net trade. A weakening in domestic demand would take some time to feed through to lower inflation. So, taken at face value, the recent rebalancing might, other things being equal, raise the prospect of inflation moving closer to target over the next few quarters, assuming the fall in sterling was sustained. Further out, the effects on inflation of the exchange rate depreciation and a possible weakening of domestic demand would need to be carefully weighed.##NewPara##Other indicators, such as the gap between service sector and industrial production growth in the first quarter, suggested that the economy was far from being in balance. Indeed, the sterling ERI had only fallen back to its November  level. There was also uncertainty about whether sterling had truly decoupled from the dollar and hence was being influenced by domestic factors, and therefore about how far it would move if the dollar/euro exchange rate changed significantly. The evidence from options markets suggested that the implied correlation between the dollar and sterling was expected to be stronger twelve months ahead than one month ahead, suggesting that the markets anticipated a degree of recoupling.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##One view was that interest rates should be maintained at % this month. The most significant development over the month had been the fall in sterling. Treating the recent exchange rate depreciation in the same way as the previous appreciation suggested that inflation would be higher than projected in May. However, in the view of some, not all of the fall in sterling should be treated as an exogenous fall in the real exchange rate, and some of the depreciation might be attributed to changes in the market s expectation of future UK inflation. The overall effect of the exchange rate##NewPara##depreciation on inflation was highly uncertain, especially if overseas exporters  margins to the UK fell more sharply than previously expected and if retail margins were squeezed further. Raising interest rates this month might push sterling up again and exacerbate the undershoot of inflation against the target in the near-term, while simultaneously aggravating the potential size of the inflationary shock further out as sterling would fall from a more elevated level.##NewPara##Some of the other indicators suggested that domestic inflationary pressures might be showing signs of easing more than expected. For example, final domestic demand growth had been weaker than previously expected in Q. Retail sales had also been weak in April, although indicators pointed to a resumption in growth in May. The housing market seemed to have slowed, which appeared consistent with slowing consumption growth.  The release of the National Accounts data for Q on  June might help clarify the extent of the slowdown. Earnings growth had so far turned out weaker than in the central projection   although other indicators suggested that the labour market remained tight. While the depreciation would, other things being equal, lead to higher inflation looking further out, inflation was still below target and likely to be so for some time. There was no need for a rise in interest rates this month, and for some members no presumption that a further rise would be needed. The depreciation of sterling would help bring about a rebalancing of the economy, and that was welcome even if it meant that at some point higher interest rates were needed. Even those members who thought that a further rise in interest rates might eventually be necessary noted that the costs associated with waiting were low in comparison to the costs that would be incurred by moving now and potentially exacerbating sterling s overvaluation.##NewPara##The alternative view was that, on balance, the data this month required a rise in interest rates of  basis points. The effect of the depreciation of the exchange rate on prospective inflation was significant and was not offset by the other news. The slowdown in final domestic demand in the first quarter was probably partly erratic and should not significantly change the outlook, although the upside risks seemed to have diminished since the May Report. The bounce-back in industrial production at the start of Q was consistent with a recovery in demand and output growth in Q. The latest evidence was still consistent with consumption growing close to trend, as projected in May.##NewPara##The labour market was tight on most measures. It was not sensible to place too much weight on the fall in earnings growth in March and there was still a risk that earnings could turn out stronger than the deceleration in the May central projection. Given the recent depreciation of sterling, the downward pressure on retail prices from the past appreciation of sterling would cease. Although##NewPara##measures of domestically generated inflation had fallen they remained above the   % target, so that a slowdown in private sector domestic demand growth was still required. Against this background, the data pointed to higher inflation than thought a month ago. Were there, nevertheless, reasons for waiting? The exchange rate depreciation could reverse; there was a risk that a rise in interest rates would be misinterpreted as being linked to the exchange rate depreciation in a mechanical way; a rise in rates might lead to an appreciation of sterling if it surprised the markets; and some of the demand and output puzzles might get resolved through the release of the Blue Book data. While these outcomes were all possible, none seemed sufficiently compelling to delay action warranted by the data. For these reasons a rise in interest rates of  basis points was desirable this month.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be maintained at .%. Six members of the Committee (the Governor, David Clementi, Christopher Allsopp, DeAnne Julius, Ian Plenderleith and Sushil Wadhwani) voted for the proposition. Mervyn King, Stephen Nickell and John Vickers voted against, preferring a rise in rates of  basis points.