The world economy##NewPara##The news on the world economy was mixed. In the United States, revised data for third quarter GDP showed a fall of .% compared with the initial estimate of a fall of .%, but this was in line with the assumptions embodied in the central projection for the November Inflation Report. Consumption, on the other hand, had been more buoyant than expected and recent survey results from the National Association of Purchasing Managers had been surprisingly strong. Labour productivity had apparently improved in the third quarter, reflecting the substantial recent reductions in employment. This should help corporate profitability, and illustrated the underlying flexibility of the US economy. The overall picture, however, was little changed: the United States remained in recession and there was little sign yet that the prospective recovery had begun. So the questions about the outlook were much as they had been at the Committee s previous meeting.##NewPara##The latest Consensus survey of projections for growth in the United States (and indeed in the other major economies) in both  and  were weaker than those the Committee had included in its central projection in November. This weakness was accounted for largely by differences between the projections for the final quarter of this year and the first quarter of next : indeed, the subsequent recovery in the Consensus forecasts was rather steeper than the Committee s own projection. The possibility of differences in the near term was becoming apparent at the time that projection had been agreed, and a weaker outlook was represented in the downside risks which had been attached to it. The implications for inflation in the United Kingdom, if the Consensus projections were treated as the most likely outcome and the downside risk removed, were thought by some members unlikely to be large. These differences in alternative forecasts, along with other news on the international economy, would be considered again in the context of the next forecast round.##NewPara##In contrast to this mixed economic news, equity prices had strengthened, bond yields had risen and implied interest rate expectations had firmed in the past month. Some analysts were putting##NewPara##weight on estimates of the typical length of post-war recessions and on that basis concluding that the US equity markets had now reached a low point. Military developments in Afghanistan could also have affected market sentiment. But the recovery seemed to be too broadly-based to be explicable simply in these terms. It was surprising, particularly given the recent downward revisions to Consensus forecasts, and seemed to indicate a fair degree of market optimism that the US economy would recover strongly in the second half of next year. However, a number of technical factors might have contributed to the rise in bond yields, including stop-loss selling, possibly exacerbated by year- end effects. There was a risk of over-interpreting these short-term market movements at a time of increased market volatility. The path of dollar interest rates previously implied by the shape of the yield curve   of a further reduction and then an increase as early as March   had given way to a path which now implied no increase until next June.##NewPara##Recent data and surveys on the euro-area economies were perhaps a little weaker than had been expected, with GDP increasing less than in the Committee s projection. Most surveys of activity and sentiment (of businesses and consumers) were somewhat weaker too. The outlook in Japan remained bleak, with further evidence of fragility in the insurance and banking sectors. There were some signs of improvement elsewhere in Asia. It was encouraging that there had so far been little contagion from the most recent crisis in Argentina.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The latest estimate of third quarter growth in UK GDP at market prices had been revised down slightly from the initial estimate of .%, to .%, but with stronger consumption growth and weaker investment than expected. GDP at basic prices had grown by .%. The Index of Production for October, which was available to the Committee at its meeting, showed a small fall on the month in manufacturing output and a fall of .% in total production (accounted for in significant part by weak energy output, reflecting the warmest weather on record for the month). Comparing the three months to October with the previous three months, both production and manufacturing had fallen more slowly, but by more than expected.##NewPara##The continued strength of consumption, despite the falls in equity prices and the weaker labour market, was notable :  its growth over the past six months had been stronger than at any time since . Retail sales had eased in October, but the warm weather was probably a factor and household spending seemed likely to be quite strong again in November. A special survey by the Bank s regional##NewPara##Agents suggested that retailers expected consumption to remain resilient into the first half of next year, though it might perhaps grow at a somewhat slower pace than in recent quarters. It was underpinned by continued strong growth in real post-tax incomes, strong household borrowing and a resilient housing market, and had shown little response to the recent dip in consumer confidence.##NewPara##Three possible explanations were suggested for the unexpected strength in consumption in recent quarters: first, that it might represent over-optimism on the part of consumers and so could end abruptly   triggered, perhaps, by a change in labour market conditions; second, that it might reflect financial market liberalisation and the associated improvements in access to credit, which had allowed consumers to sustain for a while a higher rate of consumption growth relative to income growth; and third, that monetary policy might now be having a more powerful effect on consumers, or might be taking effect more quickly, than in the past.##NewPara##In discussing these possibilities, members noted that households  income gearing was still quite low, relative to the peak reached in the late s, so the risk of an abrupt fall in consumption on that account was probably quite low. In addition, the comparative tightness of the labour market might foster expectations that it would be relatively easy to find a new job even if redundancies increased. So it would probably require a serious threat to job prospects for consumption growth to slow sharply. In the absence of such a trigger, it seemed to some members unlikely that there would be an abrupt slowing in consumption growth. Household borrowing had continued apace, and conditions in the housing market too indicated that recent international events had had little lasting impact on UK consumer behaviour. Indeed, it was remarkable how resilient consumers had been to recent shocks.##NewPara##The investment data had been characteristically erratic and were prone to substantial revision. There was, nevertheless, evidence in the data of a pattern consistent with an investment-led slowdown over the past year, with weaker investment leading first to a build-up of stocks and then to weaker output and imports of capital goods as their producers adjusted to the lower level of investment demand. It was perhaps also relevant that the slowdown in investment had particularly affected investment in plant and machinery (notably information and telecommunications equipment). Although data were not directly available on the import content of such investment, it was plausible that it was higher than average and therefore that the effect on GDP of this investment weakness was more limited than it would have been if the weakness had been more broadly based.##NewPara##The ratio of investment to output had now returned to the levels of two or three years ago, though this was still well above those of the early s.  The question was, how much further would  it fall? None of the latest data reflected to any significant extent the effects of the additional uncertainty engendered by the terrorist attacks in the United States or their aftermath. Recent survey indicators pointed to further weakness in the coming months, and the special surveys a month ago by both the CBI and the Bank s regional Agents suggested that investment decisions had in many cases been deferred until the early part of next year. It would be some time before it would be possible to determine the level at which investment would stabilise, though some members remained of the view that recent outturns were consistent with a substantial capital overhang as a result of previous over- investment.##NewPara##The fiscal plans contained in the Chancellor s Pre-Budget Report were felt to have few consequences for the inflation outlook. The differences between the Treasury s projections for output and inflation and those in the November Inflation Report were small. Government spending so far this year was somewhat below target, and would need to pick up rapidly if the target for the year was to be met; so an  underspend was possible for the fiscal year as a whole.  However, tax revenues (particularly from the financial services industry and from the associated City bonus payments to staff) were also coming in below the levels projected in this year s Budget. The net effect on activity should therefore be small. Looking further ahead, there was uncertainty surrounding the extent to which the increase in tax revenues relative to GDP in recent years was in fact structural rather than cyclical. On  one view, this might suggest that some of the tax assumptions built in to the Committee s projections, as well as assumptions about the extent of underspending, should be reviewed. But neither of these factors was likely to have large effects.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##Household borrowing growth picked up further in October, to its highest annual rate since February ; the pace of growth of secured lending to individuals had increased, growth of unsecured lending remained strong and the estimated level of mortgage equity withdrawal in the third quarter was both high and had increased from its level in the second quarter. All these data were consistent with the continuing strength of consumption growth and suggested that it was likely to remain robust for a while yet. Similarly, the money and credit indicators for the corporate sector continued to reflect its weakness: the growth in total external corporate finance had eased a little in October and the growth of sterling lending to corporates (by the major British banking groups) had##NewPara##continued to slow. The only clear exception to this trend was in their lending to the real estate sector, which remained strong.##NewPara##In the financial markets, sterling s effective exchange rate was about % lower than at the time of the Committee s previous meeting and around .% lower than the rate included in the November Inflation Report projections. This was mainly a reflection of sterling s fall against the US dollar. Interest rate uncertainty, as measured by short sterling implied volatilities, remained high beyond the very short term. Government bond yields had also risen in the past month, and so too   though by somewhat less   had corporate bond yields. The pass-through of the policy easing this year to corporates  bank borrowing rates had not been complete. To that extent, corporates might therefore have benefited less from this easing than had households. That too was consistent with the demand and activity indicators.##NewPara##Market indicators of interest rate expectations had risen sharply from their low point on##NewPara## November and now implied that official rates would reach a low point in the first quarter of next  year, at only a little below their current level. The latest Reuters  survey of economists indicated that a substantial majority expected no change in the Bank s repo rate this month.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Recent data confirmed that the labour market had probably passed a turning point and was easing gradually. On the Labour Force Survey measures, employment was falling and unemployment had edged a little higher in the third quarter.  In October, claimant unemployment had ticked up slightly and gross inflows to the claimant count had now increased for three months in succession. The latest surveys of employment were also weaker, and there were reports from the Bank s regional Agents that some firms had already prepared plans for redundancies which could be implemented quickly if the economic outlook were to deteriorate in the early part of next year.##NewPara##But inactivity was also rising, and this was associated with further falls in female part-time employment. It was for this reason that the recent falls in employment had not been reflected to the same extent in increasing levels of unemployment. This increase in inactivity suggested that there might be a greater degree of slack in the market than would be indicated by looking at unemployment alone. This could help to explain the absence of upward pressure on earnings growth in recent months. Overall earnings growth, the growth in regular pay and the average level of pay settlements over the##NewPara##past year were all little changed. With few signs of upward pay pressures, the prospect was for settlements in the Spring pay round to be much the same as, or somewhat below, those agreed this year.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Price pressures remained muted. Oil prices had been surprisingly weak in the wake of the terrorist attacks in September, when it might have been reasonable on the basis of previous episodes of international tension to have expected the reverse, and had fallen further in the past month. Futures prices now suggested a gentle pick-up in oil prices over the forecast horizon. Though inflation would therefore necessarily be lower in the short run, this effect would not persist and so was of limited relevance in setting policy to meet the inflation target over the medium term.##NewPara##Some members attached weight to the sharp fall in the import deflator in the third quarter, which had been much lower than expected. For them, this was consistent both with global excess capacity and with relatively weak producer price outturns. Others, however, noted that this deflator might not be a good indication of import prices as it was not based on direct measurement of prices. It also incorporated compositional effects. In addition, it was associated with stronger-than-expected deflators for government expenditure and for investment. This was difficult to rationalise. However, some members noted that industrial countries  export prices, which were better measured, had generally been coming in below expectations.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Members agreed that the data over the past month had been mixed and in some respects contradictory, but taken as a whole contained little that was unexpected or which had material implications for the prospects for UK inflation. The US economy was clearly weak, but no more so than had been expected at the previous meeting, and there were some more positive signs. The euro area, however, appeared to be a little weaker. The Committee s central projection for world activity growth might, if the forecast were to be reassessed now, be a little lower in the next few quarters than it had been at the time of the November Inflation Report. But at the same time, the downside risks to that projection might be rather smaller than previously thought.##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, consumption growth in the third quarter had been stronger than expected and looked set to remain robust into the first half of next year, whereas investment outturns and  prospects were weaker. So the domestic imbalance between the household and corporate sectors was continuing to widen, and it remained unclear what would bring them back into balance. The labour market was gradually easing.  This might gather pace, but there was as yet no clear evidence that it was doing so. Price pressures remained weak.##NewPara##For most members, the underlying issue for policy remained much as it had been in recent  months. On the one hand, there were the risks of doing too little to support domestic demand, and so allowing output growth to dip further below trend and inflation to move further below target. On the other hand, there were the risks of doing too much and, in doing so, creating difficulties in meeting the inflation target further out by allowing households to build up excessive levels of debt, which might in turn lead to a sharp correction in consumer spending. The balance between these risks was in their view best struck this month by maintaining the Bank s repo rate at .%. A number of factors were identified in reaching this conclusion. First, confidence seemed, for the present at least, to have stabilised and perhaps even to have improved: financial markets in particular indicated greater optimism about economic prospects. Having reduced interest rates by  basis points at the previous meeting, a further cut was not therefore needed now to bolster confidence. Consumption was proving to be surprisingly robust and continued to grow rapidly. With household borrowing also growing strongly and the housing market stable, there was no reason to believe that households needed a further stimulus at this point. Nor did household finances seem to be especially vulnerable by historical standards. Second, investment was weak and forward-looking indicators suggested that it would remain so in the coming months. But it remained unclear whether this weakness would persist beyond the early part of next year, when decisions postponed in the wake of the terrorist attacks in the United States would be taken. The implications for the outlook were equally unclear. If these outturns simply represented the correction of an investment overhang, that should in time correct itself (though it would remain a drag on growth until it had done so). If it were indicative of a change in perceptions about the longer-term prospects for growth, however, it could be a more serious concern   especially as recent reductions in short-term interest rates did not seem to be assisting companies as much as households, because of changes in the slope of the yield curve. Third, price pressures remained weak and surveys of price expectations suggested that they would remain so. RPIX inflation outturns in the next few months were likely to be temporarily lower, as the effects of lower oil prices fed through to the economy. But policy should accommodate this short-term effect and focus instead on the##NewPara##prospects for inflation further out. Fourth, the effects of recent policy action needed to be given time##NewPara##to work through fully to the economy. It was unreasonable to expect the effects to be immediately apparent, except perhaps in indicators of confidence and in financial markets.##NewPara##For some members, however, the subdued outlook for inflation warranted a further  basis point reduction in interest rates now. These members took some comfort from recent data that the downside risks to prospects for the world economy had lessened. Oil prices remained low, and higher equity prices could in the short term, at least, boost confidence and so be self-reinforcing (even though they might still be overvalued in relation to longer-term prospects, and so vulnerable to another downward correction); the inventory cycle might be starting to unwind; and there were signs that the Asian economies were beginning to regain momentum. The central projection agreed for the November Inflation Report nevertheless remained, in their view, too high. The weakening US labour market, the synchronous nature of the global slowdown and the failure of euro-area surveys to recover##NewPara##in November remained worrying. The indicators of weaker price pressures were consistent with global disinflation and with general excess capacity: the prices of finished goods, and not just of oil, were weaker, and that was material to the medium-term outlook for inflation. In addition, even if the global economy were to recover in line with the projection, these members felt that domestic price and wage pressures were weaker than was reflected in the Committee s central projection. An immediate reduction in the repo rate might also help to unwind the unwelcome rise in intermediate-term yields that had occurred since the previous meeting. A further reduction in interest rates would buttress business confidence ahead of the decisions which would be taken in the coming months both on investment plans and on employment, and was needed in order to meet the inflation target in the medium term.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at %. Seven members (the Governor, Mervyn King, David Clementi, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Stephen Nickell and Ian Plenderleith) voted in favour. Christopher Allsopp and Sushil Wadhwani voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.