The world economy##NewPara##The biggest change since the Committee s November projections had been the extent of the slowdown in the United States, and the Federal Reserve s  basis point easing of monetary policy. Members debated whether a  V  or a more extended  U  shaped path for US growth was most likely, and the nature and scale of various downside risks.##NewPara##One broad scenario was that there would be a sharp but short-lived slowdown in the United States, driven by adjustment of inventory holdings. Supported by underlying strength in productivity growth, an increased ability of firms to adjust stocks quickly and the Federal Reserve s interest rate cuts, growth would, on this scenario, begin to recover quite soon. A second broad scenario was that there could be a more prolonged or deeper slowdown, brought about by interactions between weakened business and consumer confidence, underlying economic imbalances, and the possibility of further sharp corrections in asset prices. In particular, against a background of a very large private sector net financial deficit and persistent large current account deficits, households and corporates might try to repair their balance sheets quickly, especially if expectations of sustainable productivity growth, and hence future income growth, were to be revised down.##NewPara##Some members judged that the first broad scenario was the most likely outlook, and was therefore most relevant to its immediate policy decision.   They were fortified in this view by recent   developments in US financial markets. Since early January, US equity markets had risen; corporate bond spreads had fallen back and some high-yield issuance had resumed; and the dollar had stabilised. It was unlikely that that would have been the picture if markets were expecting a  hard landing , which would imply a lower level of equity prices and a weaker dollar. For these members, recovery from about the middle of the year was most likely, which was also the view of the Federal Reserve and the IMF.##NewPara##Some other members thought the slowdown could well be prolonged by the weakness of confidence in the real economy. Households and firms were likely to adjust less quickly than Wall Street to the Federal Reserve s policy easing. Leading indicators were not yet turning up, and surveys suggested that investment growth would remain weak for a while, possibly reflecting overcapacity after years of exceptionally strong investment growth. Even without the worst downside risks crystallising, underlying imbalances would be a drag on the economy. Taken together, this pointed to a  U  rather more than to a  V , with growth most likely to recover slowly over the next year rather than more quickly from the second half of this year.##NewPara##There was a range of views on the downside risks. Some felt that a more prolonged slowdown would of itself exacerbate the possibility of further risks crystallising. Those members took less comfort from the recent performance of financial markets. There were instances of serious economic problems in the past   for example, in the UK, Scandinavia, and Japan   where asset prices had fallen sharply some time after output growth had begun to slow. Others argued that, while it was possible to paint all sorts of  disaster  scenarios, such developments had in the past typically been associated with serious mistakes in macroeconomic policy. There was no particular reason to expect that now; and there was room for both monetary and fiscal policy easing in the United States if that were to prove necessary.##NewPara##The Committee noted the various channels, discussed in the February Inflation Report, through which the UK outlook might be affected by weaker world growth, including via overseas trade and investment returns, asset prices and exchange rates, confidence, and lower world prices. So far, UK consumer and business confidence had held up well, although it was possible that the effects on domestic confidence of the US slowdown would be delayed. Some members thought that lower world export prices would have a direct, disinflationary impact on UK prices greater than was built in to the published projections. Those members also thought that the published projections might underestimate the impact of a US slowdown on the United Kingdom via the effect on the employment and investment decisions of UK firms with US affiliates. In addition, some members thought that there could be an impact on foreign direct investment in the United Kingdom by the many US firms with affiliates here whose home profitability and cash flows would be under pressure. Alternatively, foreign direct investment might conceivably be supported if, for a while, the United Kingdom and the euro area grew faster than the United States. It was agreed that this area merited further study,##NewPara##including whether there had been corresponding positive effects on the United Kingdom during recent years when US growth and profits had been very strong.##NewPara##An important influence on the UK economy would be developments elsewhere in the world. After faster growth in world output and trade than for over a decade, some slowdown was both inevitable and desirable, at least in the United States. The US s closest neighbours   Mexico and Canada   were generally forecast to slow down, following a period of rapid growth. In the euro area, reasonably steady growth was likely to be maintained, supported by still high consumer and business confidence. Japan appeared to be weakening again, but output might be supported somewhat by the fall in the yen.##NewPara##Another important influence on the United Kingdom would be sterling s exchange rate. The ERI had fallen by just over % since the Committee s previous meeting and by about  % relative to the path projected in the November Inflation Report. If the US economy proved weaker than built into the central projection, the dollar might well fall further, and sterling s effective exchange rate might fall to some extent too, mitigating to some degree the pass-through from weaker world demand into UK growth and inflation.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The Committee discussed how much news there was in the preliminary estimate of UK Q GDP growth, which at .% (quarter-on-quarter) had been a lot weaker than Q (.%) and than expected. Four-quarter GDP growth had fallen from .% in Q  to .% on the preliminary Q estimate.##NewPara##Part of the slowdown was most likely related to bad weather and transport disruptions. Growth in GDP excluding energy was somewhat stronger. The GDP data were volatile from quarter to quarter. These considerations pointed to some bounceback in Q.##NewPara##That was not certain, however. Members generally thought that there was news in the slowdown in services growth. This might be associated with the global economy slowing and in particular with consequently lower demand for business and financial services. It was, though, possible that services had been adversely affected by the weather and transport problems in Q.##NewPara##An expenditure breakdown of Q growth was not yet available. Various indicators suggested that consumption had again been robust. Retail sales growth had continued at .% in Q, and private vehicle registrations had been very strong, following publication of the Competition Commission report.##NewPara##Measures of consumer confidence had remained strong, and on some measures business confidence had risen in recent months. The Committee discussed what might explain this given the sharp slowdown, and much weaker confidence, in the United States. Possible explanations, suggested by contacts, included firms basing their responses to surveys on their latest hard data on orders; increased confidence, following the events of , that monetary policy would respond appropriately to an external shock; and sterling s depreciation against the euro over recent months reducing competitive pressures on some business sectors.##NewPara##Another possible explanation was simply that the effects of US events on UK confidence were lagged. The Committee recalled that, during the - emerging market economy crises, UK firms had not reported falling orders until the spring of , although confidence had fallen more promptly after the mid- problems in Russia and at Long Term Capital Management. It was perhaps noteworthy that the number of profit warnings had recently been increasing, particularly in cyclical services.##NewTopic##Money and credit##NewPara##Broad money and credit growth had both slowed slightly, but remained high: about % and  % respectively in the twelve months to December. Household credit growth was still close to %, and the number of mortgage approvals had increased slightly in December. Growth in bank borrowing by the non-financial corporate sector had fallen back somewhat.##NewPara##Some members drew a degree of comfort from the signs of deceleration in broad money and credit, which would be consistent with slowing private sector demand growth, but were concerned that the rate of money and credit growth was still high. In the absence of a compelling explanation of why the velocity of circulation should have changed, arguably there were upside risks from the possible monetary  overhang  implied by persistently strong growth. Other members put little or no weight on these data.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##The Committee discussed whether conditions in the labour market might be easing. Adjusting for revised estimates of the size of the working population, employment as measured by the Labour Force Survey (LFS) had fallen by nearly , in the three months to November. On the same basis, the working age population had increased by about , over the same period. But those data needed to be looked at alongside the data for unemployment and inactivity. On the LFS measure, unemployment had risen by about ,, whereas claimant count unemployment had fallen by about ,. The difference between employment and unemployment on the LFS data was accounted for by a sharp rise (about ,) in inactivity, and in particular in the  inactive  who reported that they did not want a job. While some people in this category did actually find jobs, fewer generally did so over any period than the unemployed. Taken together, recent data did not, therefore, imply easier labour market conditions.##NewPara##Other indicators suggested that conditions remained tight. In particular, according to surveys, recruitment intentions were still strong, and skill shortages and vacancies were still high.##NewPara##But this had still not spilled over into rapidly accelerating wages. On most measures average earnings growth had been drifting upwards in recent months, and the latest data suggested that settlements were a little higher than a year ago. An important question was whether they would now stabilise or continue to rise. In the short run, earnings growth was likely to fall back if bonuses were lower than a year ago, when there had been large millennium-related payments. The Industrial Relations Services survey had implied that settlements would peak around now. It was possible that this reflected a lagged effect of the rise in RPI inflation; relative to RPIX, RPI inflation would fall going forward as rises in mortgage interest rates a year ago dropped out of the index. Most members nevertheless judged that there were upside risks to inflation from earnings.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Manufacturing productivity growth had risen in recent months by more than earnings growth, and whole-economy unit labour cost growth had fallen over the past year.##NewPara##Energy-related costs had recently been volatile. Although still well below the levels expected when the November projection had been finalised, oil prices had risen again in recent weeks, possibly reflecting cold weather in the United States and developments in the Middle East. Futures markets still pointed to a gradual decline. Wholesale gas prices had risen by around % since mid-. Given that world gas reserves were abundant, however, it seemed likely that persistently high wholesale gas prices would eventually bring forth increased supply, so that the implications for inflation at the two-year horizon of the Committee s projections were not likely to be material.##NewPara##Looking ahead, with the possibly important exception of the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply survey of the services sector, all the main surveys had recently pointed to rising output prices. For manufacturing, it was possible that this reflected sterling s depreciation against the euro, which would tend to reduce the intensity of price competition from foreign firms.##NewPara##The British Retail Consortium had reported that January sales discounting had been deeper than a year earlier. The Bank s regional Agents had, however, reported the opposite. It was in any case likely that, in the short run, RPIX inflation outturns could be quite volatile. The January outturn was expected to be below December s .%.##NewPara##Survey-based measures of inflation expectations had all fallen slightly over the month. It did now seem that the autumn rise in the general public s inflation expectations had been caused by the petrol price rises.##NewTopic##The February GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee agreed the projections to be published in the Inflation Report on Wednesday  February.##NewPara##On the assumption of an official repo rate of .% over the next two years, the central projection would be for RPIX inflation to be below the target throughout the forecast period. On an alternative assumption of an official repo rate of .% over the next two years, the central projection would be for GDP growth to be a little below trend during most of , rising to around or a little above trend during ; and for RPIX inflation to fall a bit further during , before rising back to around the##NewPara##target at the two-year horizon. For both growth and inflation, the balance of risks in the published fan charts was clearly on the downside, principally reflecting risks to the US outlook.##NewPara##Some members had different views of the most likely outlook for inflation, reflecting different assumptions about the economy s supply-side performance and about the implications of the international environment. The main differences were recorded in Table .B of the Inflation Report; some combinations of alternative assumptions could reduce the inflation profile at the two-year horizon by up to   percentage point. Some members judged the downside risks to be larger than reflected in the published fan charts; for some other members there were larger upside risks to inflation than reflected in the published fan charts, so that upside and downside risks should be more or less balanced in the second year of the projections.##NewTopic##Possible tactical considerations##NewPara##The financial markets were firmly expecting a cut in the Bank s repo rate of  basis points. Both a  no change  decision and a larger cut would come as a surprise.##NewPara##The Committee noted that there was some discussion amongst commentators of whether its interest rate decisions would be influenced by the timing of the Budget or of a general election. Members agreed that there was nothing they could do about this kind of speculation other than to keep on setting the policy they thought was necessary to achieve the inflation target, in the light of all the available information, month by month.##NewPara##Similarly, the Committee underlined that the objective it had been set by the Government was to achieve the .% inflation target, which was symmetric. The parameters triggering a letter to the Chancellor about divergences from that target were part of the apparatus for accountability, not any part of the target.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Taken together, recent news implied that UK price and cost pressures remained benign, with inflation most likely to continue below the .% target for quite a while. Private sector final demand still needed to slow down to accommodate the planned increases in public spending. So far,##NewPara##consumption still seemed to be robust, as were confidence and the money and credit indicators. Investment growth was weak, however, and net trade was likely to continue to make a negative contribution to output growth over the next two years. While there were temporary factors affecting the Q output numbers, it did seem that service sector output growth might well be moderating.##NewPara##Although the labour market remained tight, creating an upside risk to inflation in the view of most members, earnings growth had continued to be moderate, and unit labour cost growth had fallen reflecting the rise in productivity growth. Rather more clearly than any of the domestic developments, the world economic outlook had become distinctly softer over recent months. This was desirable after a period in which the growth in world output and trade had been stronger than for a decade, but it altered the outlook. The most likely prospect was that US growth would recover after a pause in the first half of the year, but a deeper or more prolonged downturn could not be ruled out.##NewPara##Against this background and in the light of its latest projections, members agreed that an immediate easing of policy was appropriate. For some, a modest reduction would be a prudent precautionary step in the light of recent developments. The outlook had weakened somewhat, and RPIX inflation was set to remain below target for a while. Not altering the policy stance could endanger confidence, which might be fragile. The risks around the central projection were, though, significant on both sides, and needed to be monitored carefully. Domestically, the labour market remained tight, and consumption growth needed to slow. With household debt having risen relative to income and net trade having made a negative contribution to GDP growth for five years, there were underlying imbalances in the economy which created a risk of sterling falling at some point. There would be important information about domestic conditions from the Q expenditure breakdown, labour market data, and the Budget. So far as international influences were concerned, the risks were on the downside, but it was not appropriate for policy to seek to anticipate possible, but on current information not especially likely, scenarios about global economic developments.##NewPara##For some other members   some of whom had preferred a cut of  basis points in January   the news on the month posed a real question of whether the repo rate should be cut by  basis points now. The supply side of the UK economy was, on this view, stronger than built into the best collective projections, so that demand could recover during the second year without inflation rising to the extent projected. There were tentative signs that labour market conditions were beginning to ease; the##NewPara##long-running risk of a marked acceleration in earnings had not materialised. While reported skill shortages were high, that might well be a structural rather than a cyclical phenomenon.##NewPara##Internationally, the US slowdown was likely to last somewhat longer than assumed; the downside risks there were, moreover, serious. Importantly, even if the US economy were to recover quickly, it was likely that the published projections had understated the disinflationary impact on the United Kingdom of the US slowing. RPIX inflation had undershot the target for some while and was set to continue  doing so. A mechanical link to policy from a forecast adjusted for these considerations, and taking account of the downside risks, could easily be consistent with a  basis point cut. But it was not in fact necessary to move by more than  basis points now, since it was not optimal to respond mechanically to a two-year ahead inflation projection. First, in such an uncertain environment, a gradualist approach was better. Second and related to that, a larger cut might perversely damage confidence by leading financial markets, households and firms to reach mistaken conclusions about the Committee s assessment of the outlook. Third, sterling was likely to weaken in effective terms if, as some members expected, US growth slowed by more than was built into market prices. A gradual depreciation of sterling would of itself contribute to bringing inflation back towards the .% target; interest rates did not have to do all of the work. Fourth, it was prudent to wait and see how consumer and business confidence in the United States reacted to the Federal Reserve s  basis point cuts, and how UK confidence was affected by US developments. There was time to wait, as the lags between policy changes and confidence were probably somewhat shorter than other elements of the transmission mechanism. The possible need for further cuts could be kept under review in the light of developments.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be reduced by  basis points to .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.