The world economy##NewPara##The US economy had continued to recover broadly as envisaged in the May Inflation Report projections. Output growth had been revised up to .% in the first quarter but, as in the earlier releases, this had in large part reflected a turnround in the stock cycle. There were now several indications that growth had slowed, as had been expected, in the second quarter. Industrial production had grown less quickly, and retail sales had fallen, in May, and consumer confidence had declined on both the Michigan and Conference Board measures in June. The Institute for Supply Management indices of business confidence for June had shown a rise in manufacturing and a fall in non- manufacturing, but both movements were small.##NewPara##Looking forward, the most likely outlook was still for steady growth. The latest labour market data had shown a fall in unemployment in May, and demand would be further supported by the recent tax reductions and the falls in market interest rates in the past month. Corporate profitability had improved in the first quarter, which could help sustain business activity. It was possible, however, that the downside risks to this outlook had increased. First, the recent sharp falls in equity prices might adversely affect both consumption and investment, although it was too early to identify evidence of such effects as yet. Moreover corporate accounts were being closely scrutinised, and there was a risk that confidence could be further damaged if more cases of misreporting emerged. Second, there had apparently been an increase in the past month in risk aversion and measures of financial market uncertainty; for example, there had been substantial increases in the spreads on corporate bonds, especially lower-rated bonds, over US Treasuries, and expected equity index volatility implied by options had risen. Third, growth in broad money had slowed sharply in . Fourth, the persistent##NewPara##imbalances in the US economy gave rise to risks;in particular, household debt and income gearing remained at high levels, suggesting a downside risk to consumption going forward.##NewPara##In the euro area, economic activity continued to pick up gradually. However, net external demand, which had in turn been supported by the US recovery, had been largely responsible for this and there were still signs of weakness in domestic activity in some large euro-area economies.For the euro area as a whole, the European Commission measures of industrial and consumer confidence, and the purchasing managers  indices for manufacturing and services, taken together, were little changed in June. The rates of unemployment in France and Germany had risen so far this year, and consumption had fallen in Germany in  Q and  Q. The rise in the euro against the dollar would make it more difficult for the euro area to rely on net exports as a continuing source of demand stimulus going forward. But any fall in the contribution of exports to growth would to some extent be offset as the associated improvement in the terms of trade raised households  real income. Furthermore, the disinflationary impulse from a higher exchange rate would permit lower interest rates than would otherwise have been the case. Core inflation in the euro-area had been surprisingly persistent, although the flash estimate of the area-wide Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, on the headline measure, had unexpectedly fallen somewhat, from .% in May to .% in June.##NewPara##The first estimate for Japanese GDP in  Q had shown a strong increase, although this was likely to be subject to revision. Exports and machinery orders were higher, stimulated by a more general recovery in Asia which had been led by the information and communications technology (ICT) sector and supported by the US recovery so far this year. These positive developments for global activity might be partially offset by increasing concerns about some Latin American economies. Spreads on Brazilian debt had increased, while Argentina continued to face severe economic difficulties.##NewPara##Several of the major international equity markets had fallen by broadly similar amounts, around -%, in local currency terms since the Committee s June meeting. The dollar had declined by around % against the yen, some  % against the euro and nearly % against sterling over the same period, so the falls in the S&P  and the Wilshire indices were greater than those in equity indices for other major countries when expressed in a common currency. Much of the weakness in equities in the past month had been triggered by the news that WorldCom s profits had been overstated, and might therefore reflect a rise in the equity risk premium, possibly resulting from market concerns about##NewPara##the reliability of corporate accounts, rather than a more generalised decline in expectations of corporate earnings in the United States and elsewhere. There was as yet no evidence of material damage to US business confidence from the most recent weakness in equity prices, but there might nevertheless be some negative influence on demand, arising from an increase in the real cost of capital and the adverse impact on household wealth and consumer confidence. The level of equity prices might still be vulnerable, as it was possible that it continued to reflect a rate of growth of expected earnings that was relatively high by historical standards.##NewPara##The Committee considered four possible explanations offered by market commentators for the further decline in the dollar during June. First, the shock to equity prices had, in common currency terms, been more pronounced in the United States than elsewhere, consequently damaging international investors  confidence in dollar assets. However, the relationship between equity prices and the dollar was not completely clear-cut: on the one hand, the dollar might be vulnerable to further weakness in US equities; on the other hand, if the dollar were to fall far enough, foreign investors might then find US equities cheap in common currency terms and drive their prices up. Second, more generally, there were increasing market concerns as to whether the capital inflows to the United States which were the counterpart of its current account deficit could be sustained at the current level of the dollar. It was possible that these doubts partly reflected less buoyant expectations for corporate earnings and hence for prospective returns to equity. Third, some of the economic data released in the United States had been weaker than expected by market commentators. But it was not clear that recent US data releases had been weaker relative to the Committee s expectations than data for other major economies. Fourth, US market interest rates had fallen relative to those in other major industrial countries, perhaps because a setback to the recent mood of confidence meant that some commentators now thought rises in the Federal funds target rate were more distant than had been thought a month ago. However, the recent fall in the dollar appeared larger than would have been warranted solely by changes in market interest rates.##NewPara##The previous sustained strength of the dollar had been a puzzle. While this implied a risk that the dollar would fall at some stage, the timing of the recent depreciation was difficult to explain.##NewPara##There was no immediate reason to expect the dollar to depreciate further, but risks remained. Past experience suggested significant current account imbalances could take several years to adjust, and the associated swings in exchange rates could be similarly prolonged. Furthermore, it was not clear what would constitute an equilibrium level for the US current account: the United States had experienced a##NewPara##current account deficit for most of the past thirty years. Moreover, while the decline in the dollar to date could contribute to a reduction of international current account imbalances, it would redistribute demand towards US goods and services and away from output produced by the rest of the world. The implications of this for global demand and inflation would depend on monetary and fiscal policy responses in the United States and elsewhere.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##Growth in notes and coin in circulation was increasing and stood at over % in the year to June, although M growth remained steady, at % in the year to May.##NewPara##The growth in household borrowing from banks and building societies was particularly strong at .% in the year to May, the highest rate since the fourth quarter of . Mortgage equity withdrawal (MEW) had risen to around  % of personal disposable income in the first quarter, and seemed likely to rise still further in the second quarter. Total lending for consumption had increased to over % of personal disposable income in the first quarter, which was the highest proportion since .  While household deposits were also growing rapidly, at .% in the year to May, the net balance of flows of household deposits less borrowing was nevertheless heavily negative.##NewPara##Sterling s effective exchange rate index had risen by around % since the Committee s June meeting. Although it was still around % below its level at the time of the May meeting, it had moved back inside the broad range within which it had traded for most of the past two years. Forward rates implied sterling depreciation against both the euro and the dollar, although options prices suggested that the perceived balance of risks around these paths were not symmetrical. Relative to these implied paths, expectations for sterling-euro were skewed towards sterling depreciation, although perhaps slightly less so than last month, while sterling-dollar expectations were skewed towards sterling appreciation.##NewPara##UK interest rates had fallen at all maturities since the June meeting, by some  basis points at ten years. Market interest rates in other major economies had also fallen. The fall in rates appeared to be associated in part with the weakness of equity prices.##NewPara##The FTSE All-Share index had fallen by about % since the Committee s previous meeting, and expected volatility implied by options on the FTSE  index had risen. There had also been increases in UK corporate bond spreads over gilt yields in this period, of around  basis points for the Merrill Lynch aggregate index. The largest increases in spread had occurred for lower-rated bonds.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The latest National Accounts data release had revised the estimates for GDP growth at market prices in both  Q and  Q slightly upwards, to .% in both quarters. The level of GDP at market prices in  Q had been revised up by only .%, but within that the revisions to individual expenditure components had been more significant.##NewPara##The estimate of consumption growth in  Q had been revised to .% in Q, down by . percentage points from the original release. However, upward revisions for  and  meant that the estimated level of consumption in the first quarter of  stood .% higher than previously estimated. There had been even larger upward revisions to the estimated level of household income, such that the estimated saving ratio had also been revised up. These upward revisions to household income could help explain the previously puzzling strength of consumption over the past two years. Although it was probable that household real income growth would slow going forward, and that this would restrain consumption growth, there was now less risk of an additional downward adjustment to consumption as households  balance sheets appeared less stretched than previously thought. However, although both the households  debt-to-income ratio and households  income gearing had been revised downwards, the debt-to-income ratio had nevertheless risen in  Q and  Q.##NewPara##The volume of investment had fallen by .% in the first quarter, with a fall of over % in business investment partially offset by an increase of over % in government investment. There had been significant downward revisions to the estimated level of investment back to , and the estimate of business investment in the first quarter of  had been revised down by over %. The new data implied a much lower ratio of investment to GDP than previously believed in both constant and current price terms. Manufacturing investment had been particularly weak, but it was surprising that investment in services had fallen by almost % in the year to  Q. Overall, the profile of the aggregate investment-to-GDP ratio now appeared perhaps more plausible than before, given the recent slowdown in activity, but the Committee would need to assess whether a bounceback in services##NewPara##investment was likely as output growth recovered or whether by contrast the strength in services investment in the s had been to some extent a one-off development, particularly in the telecom sector.##NewPara##The revised data continued to imply a surprisingly large improvement in the terms of trade, of some % taking  Q and  Q together. Recent increases in the deflator for government consumption had also remained surprisingly high, which could reflect the difficulties in measuring public sector output and productivity. But even if this deflator were mismeasured, that would not necessarily have material implications for the outlook for inflation in the marketed sector of the economy, and hence for RPIX.##NewPara##The latest surveys and data releases continued to suggest a robust recovery of economic activity in the second quarter, although the normal pattern of activity might be distorted by the Queen s Golden Jubilee and the World Cup, which complicated the assessment. Retail sales had risen strongly in##NewPara##April, although they had eased somewhat in May, and the CBI Distributive Trades survey pointed to a further slowdown in annual growth in June. Manufacturing output had also increased strongly in April. Although the most recent business surveys suggested that this rate of expansion might ease in May and June, manufacturing output looked set to grow relatively robustly in the second quarter compared with the first.##NewPara##The Halifax and Nationwide house price indices had risen by .% and .% respectively in June. The annual rates of increase on both measures were close to %. That implied a further stimulus to the outlook for demand above what had been implied in the May Inflation Report projections, chiefly through homeowners  ability to use the greater equity in their homes as collateral to borrow in the form of MEW to finance expenditure. However, this effect would be broadly offset over the forecast period by the recent fall in equity prices.##NewPara##The current rate of increase in house prices was clearly unsustainable, but the Committee considered various arguments suggesting that the equilibrium level of house prices to earnings might have risen. First, a higher level might be characteristic of an economy in which the inflation rate and nominal interest rates were lower and more stable than hitherto. Without the  front-end loading  of mortgage repayments previously implied by high nominal interest rates and a higher average rate of inflation, households could service larger initial mortgage debts, and there was some evidence that##NewPara##lenders were now willing to lend a higher multiple of earnings. This transition might well help explain the strong increases in house prices up to , and the subsequent easing in house price increases might have reflected the fact that interest rates had increased around then. There was, however, a  concern based on this line of argument that the latest surge in house prices might reflect a belief by some borrowers that the reduction in interest rates from % to % over the past year would be permanent. In that case house prices would be vulnerable when interest rates eventually rose. Second, it was possible that, as nominal returns on bonds and savings deposits had declined and investors  confidence in the equity market had weakened, households had chosen to hold more of their long-term savings in the form of housing. Third, increased competition among lenders might have led to some easing of lending criteria, although there was as yet no evidence of materially higher mortgage arrears and defaults. Fourth, the slowdown in housebuilding, set against an increasing number of households, meant that the balance of supply and demand was placing upward pressure on prices. If it were the case that the equilibrium level of house prices to earnings had risen in recent years, that could be consistent with rapid increases in prices during the transition to the new equilibrium.  But it was not  clear where the new equilibrium level was, nor whether the rate of increase would level off as the new equilibrium approached or whether house prices would overshoot. Moreover, there could be a longer- term drag on consumption as households were faced with a continuing higher real level of outstanding debt, although this might not have a material effect within the time horizon relevant to the policy decision.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Employment continued to grow steadily, by , in the latest three months compared with the previous three, and unemployment on the LFS measure had been stable at .-.% for the past ten months.  Survey evidence suggested little change to this picture, although inflows to the claimant count had risen for three consecutive months. This stable picture was broadly consistent with the May Inflation Report projections, although the level of unemployment now looked significantly lower than might have been expected at the beginning of the year.##NewPara##Growth in regular pay had eased from around  % at the end of  to % in April, while the negative contribution to average earnings growth from lower bonuses had fallen. Private sector settlements had averaged .% in the three months to May. On a matched sample, settlements were around   percentage point lower than the previous year. However, it could be argued that in real##NewPara##terms this represented an increase in pay pressures: for example, the Tax and Prices index had fallen by .% in the year to March , whereas it had risen by .% in the previous year. Given the slow pace of economic activity in  Q and  Q, a bigger fall in settlements might have been expected.##NewPara##Whole economy productivity per job had increased by .% in the year to the first quarter, and the annual growth rate had now stood below the long-term trend rate of about % for over a year. It was possible that the figures were affected by difficulties in measuring output in the service sector, but productivity in manufacturing had been particularly weak, falling by % in the year to the first quarter. It was noted that the path of manufacturing productivity looked similar to that in previous economic cycles if the electrical and optical sector, which included the ICT category in which fluctuations in productivity had been unusually pronounced in the present cycle, was excluded. Against the background of weak productivity growth and a high level of employment, the Committee considered whether there would be a shortage of spare capacity in the event that economic activity picked up. It was likely, though by no means certain, that there had been some labour hoarding during the recent slowdown in activity;  average hours had fallen late last year.However, there was continuing anecdotal evidence of labour shortages across a range of different skills.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##RPIX inflation had fallen by   percentage point in May, to .%. A fall to about % had been expected, largely reflecting base effects associated with the sharp increases in seasonal food and petrol prices in May . However, although the fall in inflation had been somewhat greater than expected, the factors giving rise to it were likely to be temporary. So the low May outturn was unlikely to have implications for inflation prospects beyond the very short term. The Committee noted that the differential between goods and services inflation, at .%, was at its highest for almost  years.##NewPara##The sterling price of oil was about % higher than at the time of the Committee s June meeting, though still around % lower than expected in the May Inflation Report projections. However, oil futures prices suggested that the sterling price of oil would converge on the Inflation Report profile next year. The picture from commodity price indices was mixed: the Bank s own, more comprehensive, index showed a fall in sterling commodity prices excluding oil of nearly % in May, but the Economist index showed a rise of % in sterling terms in June, again excluding oil, and this##NewPara##was supported by a rise in the CIPS manufacturing survey of input prices. The recent rise in sterling against the dollar would tend to mitigate any impact on UK prices of rises in the prices of commodities traded and denominated in dollars.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The latest Reuters poll of economists  expectations attached a % probability to a no change decision this month, and market interest rates were also consistent with the view that no change was expected.##NewPara##The Committee considered whether the recent developments in financial markets should affect the interest rate decision. There was some evidence of a decrease in financial confidence worldwide: the expected volatility of equity prices and exchange rates implied by options prices had risen, as had corporate bond spreads. It was possible that an unexpected increase in interest rates against a background of increased nervousness could have an unintentionally strong impact on both market and business confidence. That in turn could depress output and demand and push inflation below the target.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The key decision facing the Committee remained for how long monetary policy could be set so as to encourage strong growth of consumption, to compensate for weak external demand and investment growth, given the likelihood that inflation would be rising above target towards the two- year horizon. Recent international data had not greatly changed the central outlook for the world economy. But the downside risks might have increased somewhat, and the international recovery still appeared dependent on the United States. The Committee had to assess three new developments: first, the implications of the latest revisions to the National Accounts; second, how much weight should be given to the recent developments in equity markets; and third, the continuing unexpectedly rapid increases in house prices. The estimate for Q GDP growth had been revised up, as expected; second quarter growth looked likely to be strong; and the data helped to explain some of the previous puzzles affecting consumption and investment, which might reduce the uncertainty around the Committee s projections going forward. The increase in house prices, allowing households to increase their borrowing for consumption using housing equity as collateral, could be expected broadly to offset the##NewPara##effect of the decline in equity prices on consumption and investment.##NewPara##The Committee identified a number of arguments for leaving the repo rate unchanged this month. These arguments were qualitatively similar to those identified in the previous month, although their quantitative importance had been affected by recent developments. First, the strength of the world economic recovery was uncertain. This remained the case, and the downside risks might now be greater as a consequence of increased financial market nervousness set alongside the existing longer- term economic imbalances in the United States. Second, the pace of UK economic recovery was also uncertain.   Third, there had been doubt at the previous meeting as to whether the fall in sterling would  be maintained or continue further. This was still not clear. The sterling effective exchange rate index had risen by about % in the past month, though it remained below the profile assumed in the May Inflation Report projections. Fourth, equity prices had been falling, and had fallen substantially further in the latest month. The likely effects of this on consumption and investment needed to be taken into account. Finally, labour market pressures remained benign, although there were a few signs of prospective upward pressure on input costs. RPIX inflation was likely to continue below target for some time, before rising to around the target rate next year and only moving above target thereafter.##NewPara##So a delay in raising rates was consistent with the Committee aiming to achieve the target at all times.##NewPara##The arguments identified by the Committee last month for raising rates immediately or in the near future also remained relevant. First, the sterling effective exchange rate index was still sufficiently below the path assumed in the May Inflation Report to imply a material upward effect on inflation. Second, the repo rate of % remained well below any likely long-run neutral rate, and therefore implied a continuing stimulus to activity and inflation, while the economic outlook had clearly strengthened since the repo rate had been reduced to its present level. The strength of growth in the money and credit aggregates confirmed that monetary policy was currently stimulatory. Third, at the current level of interest rates, inflation was expected to be rising quite steeply above target in the medium term. The passage of time itself strengthened the case for an increase in rates, as the time available for the increase to take effect before the projected pick-up in inflation diminished. Fourth, the prospects for demand, and in particular consumption, looked buoyant going forward, and some slowdown would be necessary. Finally, by the time the world economic recovery was clearly established, it might be too late to restrain the consequences for UK inflation.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that the arguments remained finely balanced. Most members concluded that the news on the latest month had left the most likely outlook for inflation little changed, although perhaps implying a greater downside risk than before. It was not yet necessary to raise interest rates, and there was a possibility that an increase in interest rates at this point could have an unusually sharp impact on business and consumer confidence. Some of these members believed that the arguments for not raising rates were stronger this month than at the Committee s previous meeting. One member argued that a modest increase in interest rates would be appropriate now. The arguments advanced last month both for raising rates and for waiting still held.  The direct effects of the recent fragility in equity markets should be taken into account, but it would be wrong to give undue weight to this, just as the Committee had not done so for the recent strong rises in house prices. An increase would not represent a contractionary policy stance so much as a reduction in the degree of monetary stimulus that was currently being injected.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. Eight members of the Committee (The Governor, David Clementi,##NewPara##Christopher Allsopp, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Marian Bell, Stephen Nickell and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. Mervyn King voted against, preferring a rise in the repo rate of  basis points.