The world economy##NewPara##Since the October MPC meeting, equity market indices had risen by around % in the United States and the euro area and around % in Japan. In the United States, they were now back to levels similar to those in the August Inflation Report. Just as the falls in September had been difficult to account for, it was difficult to explain the recent increases in terms of changes in either expected corporate earnings or real interest rates, although, in the previous week or so, a growing expectation in financial markets that the Federal Reserve would reduce interest rates this month had provided some support. One possible explanation was that the risk premium on equities had fallen as a result of reduced uncertainty about stock values. There had, indeed, been some reduction in the expected volatility of equity prices implied by options prices, and the tone of the market seemed to have improved. Whereas, in September, positive news about the US economy appeared to have had relatively little impact on equity markets, financial market pessimism appeared to have diminished in October.##NewPara##World activity had been broadly in line with the Committee s August central projection, with the United States perhaps having been a little stronger than projected and the euro area a little weaker. In the United States, quarterly GDP growth had risen from .% in Q to .% in Q, according to the advance estimate. That had reflected strong consumption growth; investment, in contrast, had been broadly flat. The growth of broad money and of lending to households had supported activity. Mortgage refinancing had been high, encouraged by the drop in US long-term interest rates until early October. The housing market had remained robust. Only lending to commercial and industrial companies had been weak, possibly reflecting both weak investment and a tightening of credit conditions for some corporate borrowers, judging by the rise in corporate credit spreads in Q. However, there had been some more general signs of renewed weakness in the economy during the##NewPara##quarter, for instance reflected in the tone of the Federal Reserve s Beige Book. On the output side, industrial production had fallen again in September after contracting in August. On the demand side, retail sales had also dropped in September, reflecting in particular low motor vehicle sales, which suggested that consumption growth might have weakened. Auto sales, boosted by  zero-interest  finance offers, had helped to sustain demand in Q, but it was not clear that such offers would continue to be as effective in boosting sales if households had already brought forward their intended vehicle purchases.##NewPara##Data so far for October confirmed the impression that there had been some slowing in the US recovery. The ISM indices for both manufacturing and non-manufacturing had fallen slightly, although the latter remained above the   no-growth  threshold, and unemployment had increased a little. The most striking news had been the sharp fall, one of the biggest in the past ten years, in the Conference Board Index of consumer confidence. Fears about worsening employment prospects may have been responsible: according to the Conference Board survey, the proportion of respondents describing jobs as plentiful fell to its lowest level since , while the proportion describing jobs as hard to find rose to its highest level since then.  The Michigan headline measure of consumer  confidence had also dropped, although not by as much. It was possible that the falls were partly a reaction to the falls in equity markets in previous months. If so, the recovery in equity prices in October might prompt a recovery in confidence. The falls had, however, been larger than could be accounted for by the factors usually associated with consumer confidence; moreover, such unexplained falls had in the past tended to be correlated with falls in consumption itself. The FOMC s  basis-point reduction in interest rates, which took place during the MPC s meeting, should, however, help to offset any temporary weakness in the US economy.##NewPara##Indicators for the euro area had been mixed. It was likely that quarterly GDP growth in Q had, as in Q, been a little below its long-run trend and sustained primarily by external demand. The##NewPara##euro-area Purchasing Managers Indices for both manufacturing and services had risen slightly in October. According to European Commission measures, industrial confidence had increased a little in October too. But consumer confidence had fallen somewhat, despite the recovery in equity markets. According to the IFO Index, German business confidence had continued to decline. But it would be misleading to focus only on Germany. The rest of the euro area was performing rather more strongly.##NewPara##In Japan, industrial production had continued to grow in Q and tertiary activity had picked up further in August. That would have helped the emerging market economies of Asia. China s economy##NewPara##remained robust but there were some signs of growth slackening in Korea, Singapore and the Philippines, probably due to less rapid increases in exports.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##Equity prices in the United Kingdom had increased by about % over the past month, and were now back to around the levels of late July. Sterling s effective exchange rate had fallen by around one percentage point over the month, and was also little changed from levels three months ago.##NewPara##Although the twelve-month rate had fallen back a little, the growth rate of broad money (M) on a three-month annualised basis had picked up since May. Lending by banks and building societies to other financial companies and the household and corporate sectors accelerated in Q. The growth of total lending to individuals in particular rose further, and the flow of unsecured lending in Q had probably risen to its highest rate relative to personal disposable income since the data series started in the mid-s.##NewPara##The growth of lending to households seemed likely to remain high for some time. Mortgage arrears were running at low levels and there was little expectation on the part of lenders that either unemployment or interest rates would increase significantly in the near term. The growth in lending secured on property did not simply reflect the fact that households needed to borrow more to be able to afford higher house prices. Households were able to finance consumption relatively cheaply by making use of residential property as collateral and utilising new, more flexible, borrowing products; also, as a result of the increase in house prices, fewer households were credit constrained. Consequently, it was likely that mortgage equity withdrawal had increased further in Q relative to personal disposable income. The growth had probably been fuelled partly by falls in the rates of interest charged on mortgages and credit cards relative to the Bank s repo rate, brought about by vigorous competition amongst financial institutions. It was also possible that some house buyers had not fully appreciated the persistence of the real burden of mortgage borrowing implied by the slower fall in the real value of the principal in a world of low inflation.##NewPara##House prices had continued to rise rapidly in October. The monthly rises in the Halifax index in September and October had been the largest ever recorded. Comparing the latest three months with the previous three, the annualised rates of increase on both the Halifax and Nationwide indices were now close to %. Over recent months, rates of increase had been particularly high for lower-value##NewPara##properties and in regions outside the South East;  quarterly rates of increase in the South East, however, had in fact fallen. This would narrow the gap between house prices in London and the South East and those in the rest of the country. According to preliminary data from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS), however, the net balance of estate agents expecting house prices to increase in the next three months rose in October. Also, although particulars delivered fell in September and the RICS reported a fall in the average number of properties sold by estate agents in the past three months, loan approvals rose on the month and the balance of net reservations increased. On this evidence, there was therefore little sign that the house price boom was drawing to an end.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##GDP at market prices rose .% in Q, according to the preliminary ONS estimate, a slightly faster rate than in Q. But, taking Q and Q together (to abstract from the effects of the Jubilee holiday on the pattern of output and expenditure), growth was close to its long-run trend, although slightly lower than expected at the time of the August projections. Excluding the volatile energy component, GDP growth this year had increased quarter by quarter.##NewPara##Consumption growth appeared to have dipped sharply in Q, judging by the slowdown in private buyers  car registrations and the fall in the growth rate of retail sales, although the apparent weakness may partly have reflected the impact of the timing of Easter on the Q and Q data. Information from the Bank s Agents also pointed to some weakening. In October, the GfK survey of consumer confidence had fallen a little but the overall balance was still above the average of recent years. This was consistent with a robust outlook for consumption in Q, as was the CBI Distributive Trades survey, with the balances for both reported and expected retail sales rising in October to somewhat above the historical average for the series. The prospective slowing in the growth of real personal disposable income and recent falls in household wealth due to lower equity prices were likely to act as a drag on consumption growth next year, but the further recent increases in house price inflation would provide additional scope for mortgage equity withdrawal.##NewPara##Investment, which had edged down in Q, seemed likely to remain weak in the near term. Surveys of investment intentions had generally softened and, according to the CIPS manufacturing survey, new capital goods orders had been falling. Although investment was likely to pick up at some stage simply because of the need to replace plant and equipment, the timing and strength of any##NewPara##recovery remained uncertain. Public expenditure, however, was likely to continue to support the growth of demand looking forward.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##According to the latest data, unemployment barely changed in the three months to August, on the LFS measure, or in September, on the claimant count measure. But average hours worked were .% lower in the three months to August than in the previous three months, and there were falls for both men and women, part-timers and full-timers; so labour input in terms of total hours had fallen, even though the number of people employed continued to increase. It was unclear whether this easing was cyclical, or represented a shift in the pattern of labour supply. If it was the former, it seemed larger than past experience would have suggested. There were, however, indications that the decline in average hours had taken place at least in part because workers wanted to work fewer hours: employers did not seem to be rationing the hours of work they offered to a significantly greater degree.  If so, total labour supply might now be lower than previously thought. The Working Time Directive could be part of the explanation of the downward trend in hours worked per head, but it seemed unlikely to be the only factor.##NewPara##The headline rate of growth of average earnings was broadly unchanged in August. Earnings growth in the public sector had slowed while in manufacturing it had increased, continuing the pattern of the latest six months or so. It was not clear that this divergence was significant. In part, the slowdown of reported public sector pay reflected delays in local authority pay settlements, which would be backdated when implemented (although the backdating would not be reflected in the average earnings data). It was possible that difficulties in reaching settlements were becoming greater. In the private sector as a whole, pay settlements this year had been running at a rate about half a percentage point lower than in ; this may have reflected the particularly low levels of headline inflation in the early part of . Looking forward, the prospective increases in employers  and employees  National Insurance contributions were likely to affect pay bargaining and might be one of the factors behind anecdotal reports that pay negotiations would be more difficult next year.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##The twelve-month rate of RPIX inflation rose to .% in September, bringing the average level in Q to .%, a little higher than in the Bank s projection at the time of the August Inflation Report.##NewPara##It was likely to continue to increase over the next few months, reflecting two factors which were probably transitory: first, substantial twelve-month increases in the price of oil, due to the temporarily sharply lower oil prices last year in the aftermath of the  September terrorist attacks; and second, the direct contribution of the housing depreciation element of RPIX, boosted by the acceleration of house prices over the past year. The sterling price of Brent oil had fallen by about % since the previous MPC meeting. Oil futures suggested that market participants had not changed their views much about oil prices in the long term, expecting them to be a little below their current level. It appeared that OPEC nations were still producing oil at a rate above that implied by OPEC s country quotas, which had remained unchanged at the latest review.##NewTopic##The November GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections to be published in the##NewPara##Based on the assumption of an unchanged repo rate of % over the next two years, on the central projection, the four-quarter growth rate of GDP would pick up further to a little above its long-run trend by early , before settling around trend thereafter. The twelve-month RPIX inflation rate was likely to move above the .% target by the end of this year, remaining there for much of , reflecting the temporary influences described in paragraph  above, before dropping slightly below target and then edging up gradually to around .% by the two-year forecast horizon. RPIX inflation was now likely to be higher over the next year or so than in the August projection, but marginally lower in the following year.##NewPara##There were major risks to the outlook. First, there was a downside risk to world demand. Second, there was a possibility that rapid house price inflation would continue in the short term, raising the likelihood of a sharp correction in the future, generating upside risks to consumption in the near term and downside risks further out. Third, there was also an upside risk to inflation and a downside risk to demand from the prospective increases in National Insurance contributions. As indicated by the Inflation Report fan charts, the overall risks to growth were judged to be slightly on the downside relative to the central projection, while the risks to inflation were judged to be marginally on the upside. There were some differences of view among Committee members about the overall balance of risks, but the spread of opinion was relatively narrow.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##Since August, Consensus forecasts of world economic growth had tended to fall, coming more into line with the Committee s forecasts. The current Inflation Report forecast of UK output growth next year was a little above, and its forecast of RPIX inflation was similar to, the average of the forecasts covered by HM Treasury s regular survey. However, comparisons were less helpful than usual because of the recent high volatility of asset prices; the outside forecasts had been finalised at different times and so would have assumed differing initial values for asset prices.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the policy action by the FOMC. It agreed that there was no particular reason, in current circumstances, for policy rates of different countries to change in tandem. The implications for the United Kingdom of moves in policy rates elsewhere depended on the impact of those moves on domestic demand in the countries concerned (and so on UK external demand), on interest rate expectations and on the exchange rate. To the extent that reductions in interest rates elsewhere addressed sources of weakness in external demand for UK output without being offset by yield curve or exchange rate movements, they lessened the need for UK policy further to stimulate domestic demand. It was noted that the FOMC rate reduction had not immediately had a substantial effect either on long-maturity dollar interest rates or on sterling s exchange rate.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##UK growth had been moving back to close to its long-run trend rate in the past couple of quarters; abstracting from special factors such as the timing of Easter and the Jubilee holiday and the volatility of energy output, underlying growth appeared to have picked up since the turn of the year. RPIX inflation was close to target. Looking forward, the new forecast suggested that, in broad terms, this picture of growth near trend and inflation near target was likely to be sustained. There were, however, substantial uncertainties about growth and inflation in both directions. The most significant risks were associated with international economic prospects and the growth of domestic consumption. The latest economic data had been mixed. On the one hand, the sharp fall in consumer confidence in the United States might be an early indication that US consumption was slowing, and the Q outturn for UK GDP had been a little lower than expected earlier in the year. On the other hand, equity price indices in many countries had risen substantially on the month and household borrowing, house prices and some surveys suggested that UK consumption growth would be robust in the near term.##NewPara##The Committee considered what level of interest rates was appropriate in the light of this outlook. A number of arguments suggested that a reduction in interest rates was warranted.  First, in the view of some members, the outlook for world demand was somewhat weaker than was reflected in the Committee s Inflation Report projections. US prospects were particularly important in this respect. It seemed unlikely that demand in the rest of the world would increase sufficiently rapidly to offset any adverse US developments. If the fall in US consumer confidence signalled the beginning of a##NewPara##longer-term adjustment by households of their financial balance sheets, the US economy would grow more slowly than expected. Greater caution on the part of banks and other lenders about corporate sector credit risk might restrain business investment, and the extent to which the boost to auto sales over the summer had been at the expense of lower sales in the future was not clear. Second, UK consumption growth might slow sooner than forecast. The signs were that consumption growth had been weak in Q, and it was not yet clear that the expected bounce-back in Q would materialise.##NewPara##Third, there was little evidence yet of an investment recovery. Given the signs of weakness in business confidence, UK investment might not recover at the pace assumed in the central projection and so might not contribute as expected to domestic demand as household consumption growth slowed. This risk would be greater, were the sterling exchange rate not to depreciate; it was projected to do so gently. Fourth, it was suggested that it could be particularly important to adjust interest rates pre-emptively when nominal rates were at very low levels, although the argument was less immediately relevant to the United Kingdom than to some other countries. Fifth, although household debt levels might be increased by a rate reduction, magnifying the effect of any subsequent negative demand shock, some members argued that monetary policy could address that problem if and when it arose.##NewPara##There were, however, arguments for maintaining interest rates at their current level which, taken together, most members found more persuasive. First, consumption growth in the United Kingdom was expected to remain buoyant in the near term. Household borrowing, both secured and unsecured, had been remarkably strong, demand for loans was not abating, and there were few signs that lenders were tightening credit conditions for consumers. New lending products and the sharp rises in house prices had allowed more households to use mortgage equity withdrawal to help maintain their consumption in the face of slower growth in disposable income, and the increase in housing wealth might itself tend to stimulate consumption growth. Second, a reduction in interest rates now risked stimulating house prices and household borrowing even further, increasing the risk of a sharper fall in consumption at some point in the future. Third, there were risks to the inflation projection, but they were on both the upside and the downside. The central projection suggested that the current level of##NewPara##the repo rate was consistent with hitting the inflation target both on average over the next two years and at the end of the forecast horizon. Fourth, the upside risk to costs and prices from the labour market might be greater than the forecast allowed.  The fall in hours worked might in part have  reflected a reduction in labour supply, there were some signs of greater difficulties in concluding pay settlements, and above-target inflation in the near term might risk greater upward pressure on settlements. Finally, the risks to the inflation forecast posed by the housing market were on the upside in the near term. If any of the downside risks to demand began to crystallise, there would be time to reduce rates to help keep inflation on target around the two-year horizon.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. Seven members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, Andrew Large, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Marian Bell, and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. Christopher Allsopp and Stephen Nickell voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.