The world economy##NewPara##In the United States, recent data suggested that output had grown strongly in the first quarter. More than half the .% growth was accounted for by the contribution from inventories, which were now no longer falling, but final sales to domestic purchasers were also growing strongly and had repeated the near % growth seen in the fourth quarter of last year. Productivity had increased by .% on the quarter and by more than % on the year. All this confirmed that the economy had picked up quite quickly from last year s trough.##NewPara##The question remained, though, to what extent growth would be sustained in the coming quarters. So far, the recovery had not added to employment: indeed, the unemployment rate had increased to %. Business confidence had slipped a little, after several months of rapid improvement. There were as yet few signs of a pick-up in investment, and capital goods orders were little changed from the fourth quarter. The resilience of consumption could weaken as household debt burdens increased. There were downside risks to asset prices, which could   if they crystallised   also affect consumption. These risks had increased in the past month, as information had become available to investors about the disjunction between investment bank stock recommendations and analysts  private views, and with more widespread concerns about accounting practices.##NewPara##The Committee s latest projections, which were broadly in line with recent outside forecasts, did not, however, assume that growth would continue at its recent pace, as the boost from the turnaround in the inventory cycle would be only temporary. The benchmark against which to judge the sustainability of the recovery should be that of a more gentle pace of growth for the rest of this year. The recent pick-up in investment in information and communications technology (ICT) was##NewPara##encouraging and suggested that any investment overhang in the United States might now be quite limited. Market and business concerns about the recovery, reflected in rather weaker equity market prices, could be associated as much with doubts about the extent to which corporate profitability would recover as with doubts about the sustainability of the output recovery itself. Both fiscal and monetary policy in the United States remained supportive.##NewPara##Turning to developments elsewhere in the world economy, the Committee noted that there was little change in the euro area. Confidence had again improved a little and industrial production was somewhat stronger, but it was notable that   despite the slowdown last year   core inflation remained stubbornly persistent and there were signs that this might now be leading to pressure for higher wage settlements. Recent activity data from Germany seemed quite weak, particularly in the light of the sharp US recovery. In Japan, industrial production had increased in the first quarter (the first quarterly increase since the end of ) but, as in the euro area, this largely reflected the external stimulus provided by the US recovery. There was little evidence, either in Japan or in the euro area, of any domestic engine for sustained growth. It was, however, encouraging, given the ICT-related origins of the slowdown, that there were a number of signs around the world that high-tech activity was strengthening: electrical machinery production had picked up in a number of Asian economies, notably in South Korea; computer production in the United States was now % above its trough; and even in Europe, sales of semiconductors had increased.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##There was little evidence in the monetary data of any slowing in the pace of consumer expenditure growth in the United Kingdom, with notes and coin % higher in the year to April. Broad money growth had, however, eased to  % on an annual basis in March, and was growing less rapidly than this on an annualised three-month or six-month basis. The main feature of the data for total credit remained the marked difference between the household sector, whose use of credit was some % higher than a year ago, and the corporate sector, whose borrowing from the banking system had increased by only % in the year to March and was in fact lower in the first quarter than in the fourth quarter of last year. Manufacturers in particular were continuing to repay debt. Overall, therefore, these sectoral differences were increasing.##NewPara##Measures of house prices now uniformly signalled a rapid rate of increase, with both the Halifax and the Nationwide indices increasing at over % at an annual rate. Even the DTLR index (which##NewPara##had shown prices in the fourth quarter up less than % on a year earlier) showed an annual increase of over % in the first quarter of this year. The preview of the latest survey by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors suggested that the near-term outlook for prices had strengthened, and demand for mortgages was reported by lenders to be rising. With the ratio of house prices to earnings above its historical average, the question was how soon this house price inflation would begin to slow and the speed with which it would do so.  It was by no means obvious that the current level of house prices   was unsustainable. The central May projection was for a slowdown in house price inflation, although there were risks on either side of this. But the longer house price inflation remained high, the greater the risk of a sharp correction.##NewPara##Several perspectives on these data were discussed. First, the debt-servicing burden arising from current levels of mortgage debt seemed to be sustainable at current levels of interest rates. It was also noted that, by comparison with the late s, interest servicing alone might convey too sanguine a picture of the commitments implied by current levels of indebtedness. However, estimates of debt servicing that included regular principal repayments suggested that it was still below its average since the mid-s. Second, much of the pressure on house prices had recently been at the lower end of the market, where there were many potential purchasers who were anxious to enter the market. The record low level of additions to the housing stock, combined with the rising number of households, suggested that upward pressure on the prices of entry-level properties could persist. The binding constraint on these purchasers, however, was typically the size of the loan they could obtain relative to their income, not   as had been the case in the s boom   their ability (at current levels of interest rates) to service it. Provided lenders remained prudent, that might suggest that an increase in interest rates would not of itself create similar servicing difficulties. Third, the combination of mortgage contracts denominated in nominal terms and high nominal interest rates had in the past entailed a front-end  loading of real repayments. That had been a constraint on house purchase. Now that nominal rates were lower, it was possible that a higher equilibrium level of prices could be sustained. If, however, purchasers were entering the market under misperceptions of the real burden their borrowing would entail, there would be cause for concern.##NewPara##More generally, it was not house prices themselves which were relevant for policy, but their implications for household consumption (and so, for aggregate demand) and the way it might be affected if debt burdens became less sustainable or house price expectations were not fulfilled. A significant proportion of recent mortgage lending represented withdrawal of equity. But households did not, in aggregate, seem to be converting additional debt into consumption: the saving ratio had##NewPara##remained broadly stable in the past few years. In addition, mortgage contracts offered more servicing flexibility than had historically been the case. If the economy were to weaken and unemployment to increase, some borrowers might nonetheless find their debt servicing commitments more onerous than they had expected, intensifying the slowdown in consumption.##NewPara##In the foreign exchange markets, the US dollar had fallen by just over % against the euro since the Committee s previous meeting, and sterling s effective exchange rate had weakened by about %. Though the movements had been relatively small by historical standards, it was notable that the euro had strengthened against the dollar at a time when the US economy appeared to be growing more strongly and against a background of political uncertainties in the euro area. This suggested a possible change in market sentiment.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The first estimate of GDP growth in the first quarter, of .%, was lower than expected, with both manufacturing and services weaker than had seemed likely on the basis of survey and other information. Upward revisions to early estimates were not unusual, and recent surveys had been almost universally strong: the CBI measure of business optimism showed the strongest improvement since  and the largest quarterly turnaround for over  years;  the forward-looking indicators in the surveys carried out by the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) had increased; and monthly output and new orders balances in both manufacturing and services had increased across a range of surveys. Nonetheless, the contrast between the backward-looking official data and the survey information made it hard to determine the current pace of, and near-term outlook for, output growth.##NewPara##In assessing this conflicting evidence, some members noted that the surveys of manufacturing output had not proved to be wholly reliable indicators of the steepness of the slowdown last year and the unexpectedly weak manufacturing production data suggested that the pick-up in surveys this year had not yet been reflected in higher growth. It was also pointed out that, despite the apparent improvement in optimism and in orders, there was little sign even in these surveys that investment plans or employment intentions had strengthened. The surveys could be interpreted as suggesting that growth in the second quarter would be stronger than in the first. In addition, the strongest survey indicators related to April rather than to the first quarter. So it would not become clear until data for more recent months became available whether or not these surveys were misleading. When the Committee had agreed to reduce interest rates by  basis points in November, one stated reason had##NewPara##been that it was thought very unlikely that the surveys would bounce back as they had done in analogous circumstances in late  and early . Of course, the recovery in the surveys in part reflected that decision. But a uniform and substantial improvement of this kind was unusual and should not be ignored. It remained to be seen, however, whether it would be sustained, and whether it would be translated into actual output growth.##NewPara##Consumption growth had slowed to .% in the fourth quarter, from .% in the second and    third, and was expected   on the basis of retail sales data and private vehicle registrations   to ease further in the first quarter. But it was unclear whether this trend would continue: the CBI Distributive Trades survey and vehicle registrations in April had been strong, as had household borrowing, consumer confidence and the housing market. All suggested considerable support for continued robust consumption growth.##NewPara##The Committee had discussed extensively the likely demand and output implications of the Chancellor s  April Budget announcements in preparing its latest Inflation Report projections. Initial outside commentary had suggested that there would be no net effect on demand, as both spending and taxes had been increased with little net effect on the fiscal position. Analysis for the Committee had, however, made it clear that there could be a material impact on activity and on inflation. This would be principally because of the demand implications of a balanced budget fiscal expansion. There might also be effects as a result of the way firms and workers adjusted to the increased levels of employer and employee National Insurance contributions.##NewPara##There were likely to be two main factors which would determine the size of the balanced budget stimulus. The first was the extent to which the import intensity of government spending on goods and services differed from that of private sector spending. This was difficult to judge, since it would depend on the composition of the additional spending. The second was the extent to which increased government spending would be used to increase the wages of existing public sector workers (which would in effect simply be a transfer from those paying the higher taxes). This would reduce the scale of the demand effects. But the Budget still seemed likely, on this analysis, to add to aggregate demand growth once the new spending plans took effect.##NewPara##Other possible consequences of the tax changes were discussed. It was possible that firms might respond to any real wage resistance (which would increase the relative cost of labour) by reducing employment and output. Households might reduce consumption in anticipation of the additional tax##NewPara##burden, before the tax changes took effect. Evidence was also cited by some members that the effect on demand of a balanced budget increase in government spending was less marked than was embodied in the Committee s central view, with some estimates for other countries even suggesting an effect that might be close to zero. It was agreed that further analysis would be desirable.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##The effects of the increased National Insurance contributions from April  were also important, particularly in assessing the possible consequences for wages and prices. While it was generally accepted that, in the long run, the real burden of the increases to both employer and employee contributions would ultimately fall on employees, there was great uncertainty about how the process of adjustment to this change in taxes would take place and therefore what its consequences for wages, employment and prices might be.##NewPara##In discussing this issue, the Committee had considered various channels through which adjustment might take place. Employers might decide not to pass on in price increases the higher costs implied by their own increased contributions, either because of competitive pressures or because they were confident that the Committee would act to maintain inflation close to target. So they would##NewPara##either need to curtail wage increases or face a squeeze on their margins. If the latter occurred, they would probably initially reduce employment in order to improve average productivity. The resulting increase in unemployment would in due course push down the rate of increase of wages, thus eventually restoring the level of employment. And if employees resisted the increase in their National Insurance contributions by bargaining for higher nominal wages and were able initially to shift the burden to employers, prices might then rise or employment might fall. The consequences for wages and prices therefore depended crucially on the extent to which employees attempted in the short run to resist the necessary slowing in real wage growth and on the nature of any consequent adjustments.##NewPara##Unemployment had fallen in the first quarter, rather than increasing in line with the Committee s February projection. Data on the gross flows of workers between employment and unemployment showed no indications that unemployment was about to increase significantly. This change of view seemed to fit well with the recent data and with survey indications of continued moderate employment growth: despite the lower-than-expected level of unemployment, it was noted that the labour market remained a benign influence on current inflationary pressures. This outcome for unemployment was associated with higher-than-expected inactivity and lower average hours worked. The latter suggested##NewPara##some spare capacity in the labour market. This could be absorbed as output growth picked up, without the need for substantial increases in employment.##NewPara##The recent marked movements in earnings growth were to a large extent accounted for by the substantial changes in bonus payments compared with a year ago: bonuses had contributed a fall of over  percentage points to measured earnings growth in February. This component of earnings growth should diminish in size in the coming months and exert little downward effect in the second half of the year. At the same time, regular pay was also growing less strongly and had eased from about % in the second and third quarters of last year to .% in the year to February. Falls in paid overtime hours seemed to account for rather little of this change. But there could be an additional contribution from falls in paid hours more generally, which was hard to quantify.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Annual RPIX inflation had risen a little in March, mainly reflecting slightly higher services price inflation. The level of oil prices in sterling terms had been much the same at the end of April as at the end of March, but the average for April had been about % higher than the corresponding figure for March, because of the increases during that month, and was little changed on a year earlier. Oil prices had however fallen by % between the April and May meetings. Despite this considerable volatility in oil prices, the price two years ahead implied by futures prices was still around $. More broadly, there was no evidence of any build-up in price pressures in the supply chain.##NewPara##Survey data too gave little hint of inflationary pressures. While input price measures had been edging up, particularly in the CIPS survey of manufacturing, the survey balances were still at or below their series averages. It was only in the construction sector that the surveys showed any evidence of inflationary pressure.##NewTopic##The May GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections to be published in the##NewPara##On the assumption of an unchanged official repo rate of % over the next two years, the central projection was for the annual rate of GDP growth to pick up relatively rapidly in the coming quarters##NewPara##and to be at above-trend rates from early .  The central projection for inflation was for it to slow to about % in the near term and then to increase steadily, reaching a little above the  % target by the two-year horizon and continuing to rise. In the Inflation Report fan charts, the balance of risks to growth was weighted slightly to the downside, reflecting the risks to the world outlook and of the possibility of slower growth in private final domestic demand in the United Kingdom. The risks to inflation were judged to be moderately on the upside, with the risks of a sharper depreciation in sterling and of greater upward pressure on wages and prices from the increase in National Insurance contributions more than offsetting the implications for inflation of the downside risks to output growth.##NewPara##Some members preferred different assumptions for the central projection. Some believed that the projection underestimated the disinflationary impact on UK price setting of the low rate of world export price inflation. Some differed in their assessment of the impact of the Budget spending and tax changes on the economy. As a result, some members thought that the most likely outlook for inflation was a little higher than the central projection and others that it might be up to / percentage point lower.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The Committee noted that there was no expectation, in financial markets or among the economists polled regularly by Reuters, that the repo rate would be changed this month, although there was a widespread consensus that the next change would be to increase the rate. Opinion on the timing of that change was divided. The decision of the Federal Open Markets Committee at its latest meeting to leave US rates unchanged would, it was suggested, have reinforced the UK market view of no   change here this month.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee agreed that the prospects for the world economy now appeared to be a little less strong than had seemed likely a month ago. The rapid recovery in the United States, associated in large part with the stock cycle, had faltered in the past month and it seemed probable that the pace of the recovery there would now moderate. While it was encouraging that the ICT sector was showing evidence of recovery, not just in the United States but elsewhere in the world, the recent falls in equity prices could signal doubts about future profitability. Such doubts would not encourage the pick-up in investment which would be needed to underpin a more durable recovery. The evidence for recovery##NewPara##elsewhere in the world, notably in the euro area and in Japan, seemed limited. Those economies were at present dependent for recovery on increased demand from the United States and lacked any obvious domestic engine for sustained growth. Core inflation in the euro area remained persistent.##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, recent data were somewhat less encouraging than the Committee had expected a month ago. In particular, current estimates of GDP growth were below expectations in both the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of this, and industrial production remained weak. In contrast, the forward-looking information from recent surveys pointed to a strong pick-up in the##NewPara##second quarter, although it was difficult to know how much weight this survey evidence should be given. Consumption growth might perhaps have eased a little, but consumer borrowing and the housing market remained strong; and early indications were that consumption growth would not ease significantly in the second quarter. Given the weaker-than-previously-expected prospect for world activity, this was not unwelcome. But the immediate issue, of whether UK consumption growth would ease as world demand recovered, or would need to be restrained by policy action, remained much as before.##NewPara##In addition, the implications for demand and for inflation of the changes to taxation and spending announced in the Chancellor s recent Budget now needed to be considered. There were uncertainties about the impact of the Budget on demand, and about the way in which employers and employees would adjust to the higher National Insurance contributions, on which members of the Committee took differing views. Much of the effect would not, however, be felt immediately, given the deferred implementation of these changes, and the Committee agreed that there would be time for further analysis and to watch for early indications of any pass-through of the tax changes to wages and prices.##NewPara##Against the background of the latest Inflation Report projections, which showed inflation rising above target by the two-year horizon and pressures continuing to build, members agreed that, in the absence of new information which changed those projections, the repo rate would need to be increased eventually. But members took different views on the future path of inflation and on the speed with which policy would affect it. Those differences had implications for their views both on how soon such an increase would be needed and on how large an increase would be required to continue to meet the inflation target.##NewPara##Some arguments for an immediate increase in the repo rate were identified. For some members, the latest Inflation Report projection itself could justify that change. Given the upside balance to the##NewPara##risks around the central projection, the mean of that projection was for RPIX inflation to reach .% in two years  time and to be increasing. While the effects of the Budget on inflation were assessed to be small in the first two years of the projection, they could be more significant at longer horizons.##NewPara##Starting to increase interest rates now, to offset those future inflationary pressures and to assist in the process of accommodating the planned expansion of government spending, would limit the extent to which interest rates might eventually need to increase. In addition, such action would reinforce the signal given by the projections, that inflationary pressures were soon expected to build. It would also be a clear signal that the Committee would not be prepared to accommodate any inflationary pressures which might result from the way firms and workers adjusted to the tax changes announced in the Budget. Some members also noted the longer-term risks posed by the imbalances between final demand and output in the economy: the longer they were allowed to persist, the larger would be the adjustment which was eventually required and this could also, unhelpfully, be associated with sharp falls in the exchange rate. Concerns were also expressed that current rates of house price inflation were unsustainable. Action now to moderate house price inflation and to check the accumulation of household debt could help to reduce the risks further out.##NewPara##There were, however, a number of arguments   given different weight by different members   for not increasing the repo rate this month. First, it was still not clear that recovery was well- established, either in the United Kingdom or in the world more generally, or how strong it would ultimately prove to be. While it would be wrong wholly to disregard the prospect of a strong pick-up in UK output, as was suggested by recent surveys, the sharp contrast between the surveys and recent outturns suggested that some caution was justified. Second, and related to the weaker tone of recent data, confidence could be fragile. An immediate increase in the repo rate might set it back and delay recovery. Third, while house prices were increasing at a pace which could not continue, their current level did not yet seem to be obviously unsustainable. Fourth, the near-term outlook for inflation was benign and much of the projected inflationary pressure did not become significant until towards the end of the forecast horizon.  While recognising the need to be pre-emptive, members noted that some   at least of the effect of a change in the repo rate would come through quite quickly and that an increase was not yet justified by the apparent pressures further out. Fifth, there were considerable uncertainties##NewPara##  particularly as to the possible effect of the increases in National Insurance contributions   about some of the factors which were in due course projected to push inflation above target. It was not clear, given the new monetary policy framework, that historical experience would be a good guide to assessing these effects. Those possible sources of inflationary pressure could be monitored and policy could then respond as necessary. Sixth, some members felt that the central projection for inflation was##NewPara##too high. They did not expect inflation to rise above the target rate within the forecast horizon, and had a more balanced assessment of the risks. Some of the relevant arguments were that the inflation projection underestimated the level and growth rate of potential output; that it overestimated the demand effects of the Budget; and that it made too little allowance for the moderating effect of world prices on UK inflation. For these members, any increase in the repo rate might be some way off.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.##NewPara##Finally, the Governor expressed his appreciation to Ian Plenderleith and to Sushil Wadhwani for the contributions they had made as members of the Committee. The Treasury representative added the Chancellor s own thanks for the way they had discharged their responsibilities.