The world economy##NewPara##The main development since the Committee s September meeting had, once again, been a substantial fall in most leading equity market indices. The FTSE All-Share index had fallen by some %, the S&P  index by %, and the Dax by some % over the period. Implied volatility in equity markets was close to the levels reached in the second half of . The falls in equity prices since  had been initiated by the weakness of the information and communications technology (ICT) sector, but this year equity prices had fallen across a wide range of sectors in all the major markets.##NewPara##There were various possible explanations for the most recent falls. In the euro area, medium- term expectations for earnings per share reported by the Institutional Brokers Estimate System (IBES) had been falling since April, which was consistent with changes in market expectations of growth there. In the United States, however, the falls in equity prices this year could not fully be accounted for by lower expectations of medium-term earnings and changes in real interest rates, which might indicate that there had been a rise in the equity risk premium.##NewPara##The Committee considered whether equity prices were moving closer to a sustainable long-term equilibrium. On some measures this appeared to be the case: for example, based on the ratio of the equity price to the average of earnings over the previous five years, the S&P  and FTSE- indices were now close to average values over the past seventy years. However, such backward- looking calculations were sensitive to the choice of sample periods and to the number of years  earnings included. Moreover, history suggested that equity prices could undershoot their longer-run##NewPara##There were several mechanisms by which the falls in equity prices could adversely affect world demand. First, the reduction in personal wealth could be expected to reduce consumption. Second, the fall in equity prices might imply a higher cost of capital; and this, combined with greater uncertainty about economic prospects, could reduce investment. Third, the effect of lower equity values on the net asset positions of financial intermediaries in some countries could reduce their ability and willingness to provide credit to the private sector.##NewPara##The overall impact of weaker equity prices on the global economy would be mitigated by the associated falls in interest rates. For example, in the United States and the euro area, the expected policy interest rates implied for spring  had fallen over the past month by some  basis points. Nominal and real rates had also fallen there in the three-to-five year maturity range, following larger falls in interest rates at all maturities during August. But lower medium-term and longer-term interest rates had not been reflected fully in the cost of capital to business because of a rise in corporate spreads in the major markets.##NewPara##These financial market developments did not appear wholly consistent with the latest economic indicators and with surveys of business and consumer confidence in the major economies. The US economy still seemed to be evolving broadly as envisaged in the August Inflation Report projections, although the latest indicators were mixed. It was possible that third quarter GDP would be stronger than projected, although this rate of growth might not be sustained. There were signs that investment might be turning up: non- defence capital goods orders had risen by .% in August, and ICT sector output had picked up during the course of the year. Recent labour market indicators had suggested that the economy had passed its trough: unemployment had fallen to .% in September. Manufacturing output had, however, fallen by .% in August. The manufacturing purchasing managers  index (PMI) had fallen in September, but the non-manufacturing PMI had risen. Consumption had been robust, but this had partly reflected strong car purchases encouraged by generous financing deals. House prices had increased by .% in the year to  Q on the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight measure, which had helped to offset the impact of lower equity prices on consumption. But this rate of increase might not be sustained. Consumer confidence had weakened sharply since the spring. Downside risks to activity remained from the continuing imbalance between domestic and external##NewPara##demand, as well as from the possible future impact of the recent equity price falls.##NewPara##Economic news from the euro area had been a little weaker than the Committee had expected. Industrial production had fallen by .% in July after rising by % in June, and both manufacturing and service sector PMIs had fallen below  in September. Industrial confidence had remained unchanged, but consumer confidence had risen very slightly in September. The flash estimate of the harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP) for September had been .%, which was above the range the ECB regarded as consistent with price stability. The deadline by which member countries were to reduce their budget deficits to close to balance under the Stability and Growth Pact had recently been extended to . In Germany, business and housing investment and consumption had all been weak in the third quarter, but retail sales and manufacturing output had risen in August, consumer confidence had picked up in September, and the latest IFO survey had not been as weak as expected. Inflation was lower in Germany than elsewhere, implying that ex post measures of real interest rates were higher there, while equities had fallen by more than in other euro-area countries, perhaps reflecting greater downward revisions to expected earnings. German banks appeared to be tightening their lending conditions, which might have a particularly adverse effect on small- and medium-sized companies.##NewPara##There had been some better news from Japan: Japanese industrial production had risen by .% in August, and the Tankan survey had risen in Q, although it remained negative. Exports to the rest of Asia were growing robustly, and there had been some signs of political intent to begin resolving the problems in the banking system. In several other countries in Asia, domestic demand was now growing robustly and with perhaps somewhat less dependence on the US economy. The non-Japanese Asian economies accounted for around a fifth of world trade, and so their recovery might make a material contribution to world growth, though their share of UK trade was much smaller.##NewPara##For the world economy as a whole, the latest indicators and the falls in equity prices, if sustained, suggested that prospects for activity might be a little weaker than envisaged at the time of the Bank s August Inflation Report, which had already assumed slower growth than the IMF and Consensus forecasts published at around the same time. The downside risks had increased. The weaker outlook for world activity need not, however, necessarily result in lower UK inflation in the short run, because the recent rise in food and oil prices might result in higher world export prices.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##Growth in the UK broad money aggregates had slowed in August: the twelve-month increase in M was .% while the corresponding increase in M lending was .%. Within the M lending total, banks  lending to corporates had picked up, although manufacturers continued to repay bank debt. There had been a reduction in corporates  foreign currency borrowing, which might reflect a reduction in the supply of credit by foreign banks as credit conditions in their home countries tightened. Foreign currency facilities to corporates had fallen by more than their foreign currency borrowing in the first half of . Nevertheless, total external finance in August was higher than the recent average. Household borrowing growth had increased still further, to an annual rate of over %. The recent strength of house price inflation had permitted a rapid increase in mortgage equity withdrawal (MEW), to nearly % of personal disposable income in  Q; if the past relationship between MEW and loan approvals were to be maintained, this figure might rise further in the third quarter, which was likely to imply total lending for consumption of over % of personal disposable income, close to the peak reached in . Although the repo rate had been unchanged for nearly a year, some interest rates facing the personal sector had fallen recently: the quoted rate on personal loans had fallen by an average of almost one percentage point in the past month, while two-year and five-year fixed rate mortgage rates had fallen materially in the past two months in line with the general fall in wholesale market interest rates.##NewPara##UK equity prices had fallen by less than in most other major markets over the past month. The exchange rate for sterling had risen and now stood some  % above the level assumed for the end of the third quarter at the time of the August Inflation Report. The fall in both short-term and long-term government bond rates since the Inflation Report had been less than in the United States and the euro area, while investment grade sterling corporate bond spreads had risen by less than spreads on dollar and euro bonds over the same period. All these market indicators were consistent with a relative improvement in UK growth prospects. Since June, the Consensus forecast for growth in  had been revised down less for the United Kingdom than for the United States or the euro area, while IBES expectations for growth of earnings per share in the medium term had been little changed in the United Kingdom, despite markdowns in the euro area.##NewPara##In recent years, some traders and market commentators had associated currency appreciation with relatively strong growth performance, and it was possible that the relative resilience of UK##NewPara##economic indicators was one factor contributing to the strength of sterling over the past two months. Such a relationship could reflect a view that short- and medium-term interest rates would rise more, or fall less, in a faster-growing economy. International political uncertainty or other short-term influences could also have contributed to the recent strength of sterling. However, there was no evidence that recent movements in sterling had been associated with movements in the price of oil.##NewPara##The Committee concluded that it remained difficult to explain short-term movements in sterling.##NewPara##House prices had continued to rise sharply. Both the Halifax and the Nationwide indices showed increases of around  % over the past two months. There were some tentative indications that##NewPara##activity in the housing market might be slowing. For example, the House Builders  Federation monthly survey showed that the percentage balance of respondents reporting an increase in net reservations over the same month in the previous year was + in August, after allowing for seasonal factors, whereas the corresponding figure for April had been around +; loan approvals in the three months to August were some % higher than a year earlier (after taking account of variations in the number of working days in each month), whereas the corresponding figure in April had been around %; and there were also signs of easing in the number of particulars delivered and the number of sales per instruction at estate agents. But the level of housing activity was still high and the signs of cooling were inconclusive. It was not clear how quickly the rate of house price increases would fall back to around the rate of increase in earnings, nor where the level of house prices stood relative to its equilibrium, given that in recent years##NewPara##a variety of economic and demographic influences might have raised the equilibrium relative to its historical average.  The main significance for monetary policy of the rapid increase in house prices was that the increase in housing equity permitted home owners to borrow, in the form of mortgage equity withdrawal, more cheaply and readily than they could otherwise have done, so supporting consumption. If house price inflation were to fall more sharply than projected, there would be a risk to the outlook for consumption.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##New information relating to  Q and Q had helped the assessment of the underlying trends in the economy, although the effects of the Golden Jubilee holidays continued to make interpretation difficult.##NewPara##On the demand side, consumption had increased by .% in the second quarter, which was slightly faster than envisaged in the August Inflation Report forecast. Growth was expected to be much slower in the third quarter. This partly reflected the effects of the timing of Easter and the Jubilee holidays on the pattern of retail sales.  There had also been a very sharp decline in car sales; this slowdown might have reflected a smaller stimulus from new registration plates than the previous year. Some other indicators suggested continuing strength: retail sales had risen by .% in August, and stood % higher than a year earlier; consumer confidence surveys suggested continuing optimism, and in particular the latest GfK survey had shown households  confidence in their own economic position over the next twelve months to be at a record high. Although the household saving ratio had fallen to .% in the second quarter, the household sector had still been broadly in financial balance in that quarter. The greater-than-expected rise in house prices would tend to offset the influence of the fall in equity prices on consumption, and might lead to a stronger near-term prospect for consumption than envisaged in the August Inflation Report. However, average quarterly growth in consumption in the first three quarters of  taken together was likely to be lower than for any comparable period in the previous few years. Moreover, it was possible that the effect of the fall in equity prices on consumption could increase over time, if more households were to find that their savings were inadequate to repay their endowment mortgages or to provide for their pensions. This last concern, however, might not be material within the period relevant to the Committee s policy decision.##NewPara##Business investment was estimated to have been broadly unchanged in  Q, although a further fall had been expected. But the latest revisions to the National Accounts data showed that business investment had fallen more sharply in  Q and  Q than previously estimated, so that the level of business investment in Q was broadly in line with the August Inflation Report. It was possible that the increase in uncertainty following the terrorist attacks on  September had had a greater impact than previously believed. However, this did not necessarily imply that any subsequent recovery would now be stronger. Uncertainty concerning both economic prospects and the international situation was still high. The latest report on manufacturing by the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) had shown new orders of investment goods much lower in August than in April and May. The Bank s regional Agents had reported that the level of investment in the service sector was expected to fall in the next twelve months relative to the past year. Corporates  gross operating surplus had fallen in  Q, while profit warnings in September had risen to their highest level in . And the cost of capital had risen in the second quarter, with the fall in equity prices not fully offset by lower long-term interest rates, while there was evidence that some foreign financial##NewPara##intermediaries might have reduced the supply of bank credit to UK corporates.##NewPara##Government consumption had fallen by .% in real terms in the second quarter. However, this had probably reflected the effects of the Jubilee, and a sharp recovery was likely in the third quarter. Tax receipts, in particular from corporation tax, were running somewhat lower than had been forecast at the time of the Budget, so, with spending broadly on track, the public sector was helpfully continuing to support domestic demand.##NewPara##Net trade had made a contribution of . percentage points to GDP growth in  Q. This partly reflected temporary factors associated with the Jubilee. Nevertheless, underlying import and export volumes had recently been broadly flat, while the terms of trade improvement at the beginning of the year had been maintained in the second quarter. Overall, this represented a surprisingly strong trade performance given the relative weakness of demand in the United Kingdom s main trading partners. The Committee identified three possible explanations for this. First, it was possible that any improvement was erratic, or the product of measurement errors. Second, domestic demand had recently been relatively weak in the most import-intensive sectors, such as investment goods and exports. Third, it was conceivable that there had been an underlying improvement in UK non-price competitiveness.##NewPara##On the output side, manufacturing output and industrial production in August had been weaker than expected. As expected, there had been a very strong increase in vehicle production, but this had been offset by relatively weak outturns in most other manufacturing subsectors. Overall the trend in manufacturing output since February appeared to have been broadly flat. The latest CIPS manufacturing PMI had shown a fall in September, but the figures for output and new orders had increased, suggesting a very gentle recovery. The picture in the service sector continued to be more buoyant. The CIPS services survey had shown an increase in September; the index of service sector output had suggested that growth in services was running at about  % per quarter; and the Bank s Agents had reported that contacts expected a pick-up in both corporate and consumer services. Looking at output as a whole, it was striking that while the United Kingdom had had the weakest growth of industrial production among the major seven economies in the middle of , it had had the strongest GDP growth, although growth in the second and third quarters taken together looked likely to have been slightly weaker than envisaged in the August Inflation Report projections.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##LFS employment had risen broadly in line with population growth in the three months to July, though this had been more than accounted for by increased part-time employment and the Workforce Jobs survey had suggested a smaller increase in employment. The latest CIPS surveys showed employment falling in both manufacturing and services and rising in construction. But these surveys did not cover the public sector, which had increased employment in the past year by an average of over , per quarter. Overall, inflows to unemployment had not picked up significantly and were still broadly matched by outflows. Unemployment showed a rise of , on the ILO basis in July, but its rate was unchanged at .%, while the claimant count had fallen by , in August. The September REC survey had suggested that the availability of agency staff had increased, and the Bank s Agents had reported some easing of shortages of staff with particular skills, although anecdote still suggested some difficulties in recruitment, for example of HGV drivers. In summary, the indicators were consistent with a very modest easing in the labour market.##NewPara##The Committee noted the first results of the  Census, which had suggested that the UK population was about one million smaller than previously thought. The ONS had concluded that male emigration, particularly those of prime working age, had been underestimated since the  Census. However, this would be of little significance for the Committee s forecast unless the additional emigration had been concentrated in the most recent years: a persistently lower rate of growth of the population simply implied a small offsetting increase in the estimated rate of growth of productivity over that period.##NewPara##The underlying rate of growth in average earnings had been difficult to assess in recent months because of volatility in the pattern of bonus payments, but this influence was now disappearing. Average earnings in the private sector had increased by .% in the year to July. Public sector earnings had increased by .% in the same period, but would increase faster once the delayed settlement for local authority workers, covering a million employees and offering between .% and .% over two years, took effect. There was little sign of any overall change in pay pressures, and private sector settlements were lower than at the same time last year.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##The spot price of oil had risen by more than a dollar per barrel since the Committee s September meeting, but this appeared to reflect temporary factors, since the futures price two years ahead was little changed. However, the Committee noted that the futures price had not in the past been a good predictor of the evolution of the spot price.  Food commodity prices had risen by % on the month, and by % since May, but the impact of this was likely to be offset by falls in the prices of metals and non-food agricultural products.##NewPara##RPIX inflation had been .% in the year to August, slightly weaker than expected.  This inflation rate was expected to rise towards, and possibly above, the target rate of .% by the end of the year, reflecting three influences. First, the period in late  in which inflation had been reduced by a fall in petrol prices would soon drop out of the calculation, and this would raise measured inflation in the latest twelve months. Second, oil prices had risen more recently. Third, there had been a strong and rising contribution from the housing depreciation component.##NewPara##Within RPIX, goods prices had fallen by .% in the year to August while service sector prices had risen by .%. Although some difference in inflation between these sectors was to be expected, because of the higher rate of growth of productivity in goods output, the current divergence was exceptional and was greater than could be accounted for by the difference in productivity growth. However, the Committee recognised that the inflation target was set in terms of the aggregate RPIX index, notwithstanding divergent behaviour in any individual subsector.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##Only one of the economists polled by Reuters expected a reduction in rates at the October MPC meeting, although the mean probability attached to a no-change decision was % compared with % for the September meeting. Short-term interest rates had fallen slightly on the month, and suggested that market participants believed that a reduction in the repo rate was possible over the next few months but was unlikely this month.##NewPara##The Committee noted that economic data due to be released over the next month, including preliminary GDP data for Q, could give a clearer picture of underlying trends in demand and activity##NewPara##taking out the effects of the Jubilee, and that it would be possible to evaluate more fully the impact of the recent news from financial markets in the context of the forecast round.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The news over the past month suggested that prospects for the world economy were slightly weaker than envisaged in the August Inflation Report projections, largely reflecting developments in the euro area. Moreover, the downside risks to the world economic outlook appeared greater. If sustained, the recent falls in equity prices posed a risk, both to the global and the domestic economy, although there had recently been a contrast, at home and abroad, between the weakness of equity prices and the general resilience of most confidence measures. In the United Kingdom, underlying consumption growth, supported by strong growth in household borrowing facilitated by a rapid increase in house prices, remained reasonably buoyant, although there were tentative signs that housing market activity was slowing. Government expenditure, net of taxes, was also supporting activity, although business spending remained weak. The profile for inflation in the next few months might be slightly higher than expected at the time of the August Inflation Report projections, but further out it could possibly be a little lower.##NewPara##As for some time, the Committee agreed that the key issue was whether, in the face of continuing slow growth in external demand, monetary policy should now provide a further stimulus to domestic demand. On the one hand, there was a risk of failing to prevent too rapid a slowdown in domestic demand growth before the world economy picked up, which might imply that inflation would fall below target over the next two years or so. On the other hand, there was a risk that maintaining the momentum of the economy would add to the build-up of household debt and house price inflation, leading at some point to a sharp retrenchment in consumer spending and a fall in the rate of inflation further ahead.##NewPara##The Committee identified a number of possible arguments for reducing the repo rate this month. First, the outlook for the global economy, in particular for the euro area, was a little weaker, and UK domestic demand (though not total demand) had been less strong over the second and third quarters than expected. Second, one reason for not reducing rates in August or September had been that the recent asset price movements (the fall in equity prices and the rise in sterling) might have been temporary. The fall in equity prices had in fact gone further, and the rise in sterling had persisted.##NewPara##Third, the downside risks to the outlook had increased. Without a pre-emptive repo rate reduction now, domestic demand growth might fall faster than currently envisaged, leaving inflation below target for longer. If the lower profile of market interest rates were to be sustained, the Committee would eventually need to reduce rates in line with market expectations.  Finally, the profile of inflation had already been expected to be below the target for most of the next two years at the time of the August Inflation Report, and an interest rate reduction had been under consideration for some time,##NewPara##so on this view the recent news would justify a reduction in rates without waiting for a further forecast.##NewPara##The Committee also identified a number of possible arguments for leaving the repo rate unchanged. First, domestic demand was still quite resilient and the economy was growing at close to potential. An interest rate reduction seemed likely at present predominantly to affect house prices, household borrowing and consumption, which were already increasing strongly. A further reduction in the repo rate risked creating an unsustainable increase in debt which might subsequently unwind sharply. This would increase the risk of undershooting the inflation target in the medium term. Second, inflation had been projected in the August Inflation Report to be rising at the end of the forecast horizon. Third, it was difficult to quantify precisely the net effect on inflation of the changes to equity and house prices, the exchange rate and other news in the past two months. It was not clear either that the world outlook would be significantly softer than in the August Inflation Report. The November Inflation Report round would permit a fuller assessment of underlying trends in demand##NewPara##and output. Finally, one member, who in September had been particularly concerned about signs of an abrupt slowing of consumption, felt that the case for a reduction had diminished in the light of the more robust consumption indicators in the past month.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that the decision remained finely balanced. Most members, weighing the arguments, preferred to leave the repo rate unchanged and to review all the recent information in the context of preparing the November Inflation Report forecast. Others regarded the news in the past month, together with other news since August, as sufficient to warrant an immediate repo rate reduction given that the decision had in their view been finely balanced for a while.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. Six members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, Andrew Large, Charles Bean, Marian Bell and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. Christopher Allsopp, Kate Barker and##NewPara##Stephen Nickell voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.