Demand and output##NewPara##The Committee discussed the implications of the new Mori survey on demutualisation windfalls. The survey results broadly confirmed the assumptions used in the August Inflation Report. However, the survey suggested that the time profile would show a more concentrated impact in mid-  when the payments were made, arising from the immediate impact on those freed from their liquidity constraint; and a smaller impact next year and the year after.##NewPara##The latest BRC survey indicated a slowdown in retail sales in August. This was consistent with suggestions that the immediate effect of the windfalls had begun to tail off, although it was also noted that much of the windfall expenditure, for example on cars and foreign holidays, would not be captured by the retail sales measure. It was also pointed out that other survey and anecdotal##NewPara##evidence, and the data from some retail groups, pointed to a weaker August than July; and that this would be consistent with the M data.##NewPara##Overall the Committee thought that the Mori survey results, taken on their own, suggested that windfalls posed a smaller upside risk to the central projection in the Inflation Report than had earlier been thought. The Mori survey had not confirmed some of the more extreme estimates which had been suggested.##NewPara##Moving on to fixed investment, Committee members discussed the preliminary aggregate data which showed investment barely rising. By contrast some sectoral data showed investment rising robustly in the second quarter, and it seemed unlikely that those sectors for which data were not yet available - private residential and public sector investment - would have fallen sufficiently sharply to validate the aggregate data. The Committee therefore thought that the aggregate figure might be revised upwards.##NewPara##As for external trade, the Committee noted the suggestions by Bank staff that import prices for the EU might have been overestimated and import volumes commensurately underestimated. If this proved true, it would imply that the domestic value added component of UK inflation would have been correspondingly higher, since there was no evidence of distortions to the RPI, and a higher level of domestically generated inflation would be a cause for concern.##NewPara##The Committee reviewed the puzzling relationship between the rising exchange rate and robust trade volumes. It was agreed that modelling trade was problematic, in other countries as in the UK, with income and relative price effects rarely providing a complete explanation of the data. Time trends to capture other influences were frequently used but were not informative. One possible view was that there had been a fundamental improvement in the UK s underlying trade performance which had led to, and to some extent offset, sterling appreciation. Another view was that the lags in transmitting exchange rate movements were longer than expected. Firms would try to maintain export market share in the face of uncertainty about how long sterling s appreciation would be sustained. For at least some firms, the strength of domestic margins would have helped them absorb the squeeze on export margins. On this view the impact of the appreciation would eventually come through, although sterling s recent retreat might moderate its scale.##NewPara##Committee members noted that the survey evidence continued to point to a deteriorating export outlook. Whilst the most recent data for continental economies suggested that economic growth was picking up, much of this was export rather than domestic demand led. The recent##NewPara##financial crises in Asia would tend to reduce external demand but, unless the problems became more widespread, probably not by a significant amount or for very long. Overall the Committee saw no reason to change the central projection of the August Inflation Report, that the appreciation of sterling since August would cause net exports to make a significant negative contribution to GDP over the next two years.##NewPara##The Committee noted the evidence, including the latest CIPS survey, that service sector output, whilst still growing strongly, had decelerated a bit in Q, following strong recorded growth in Q. Meanwhile the latest industrial production data contained significant back revisions, suggesting that Q GDP growth might be revised upwards slightly. Manufacturing output looked less weak in recent months than had previously been the case.##NewTopic##Asset prices##NewPara##The Committee turned its attention to asset prices, particularly equities and the housing market, noting that recent rises had been dominated by particular sectors (in the equity market) and particular regions (in the housing market). Even at the aggregate level not all asset prices had been growing strongly. For example, although Tobin s Q, which is the ratio of the market valuation of ICCs to the replacement cost of their capital stock, is estimated to have been exceptionally strong in the s, the prices of industrial, retail and office property had been growing this year by only  to % per annum, after falling by between  and % during .##NewPara##As regards house prices, it was hard to interpret the latest data, given the increasing divergence between the Halifax index, with its longer track record and bigger sample, and the Nationwide index, which was showing faster growth in line with DoE data. Part of the rapid rise in house prices may have represented a bounceback from the low levels associated with debt deflation in the late s and early s. On this view, house price inflation should moderate as debt:income ratios fall back to more normal levels. This could explain the recent moderation in the Halifax index. However the Nationwide and DoE indices were less reassuring. The Committee noted that rising house prices would have contributed to the rise in consumer confidence reported by surveys. These surveys were regarded as corroborative, rather than independent, evidence of strong consumer demand.##NewPara##High and rising stock market prices were a concern both because of their immediate contribution to the rapid growth of consumption and because, if they proved unsustainable and fell##NewPara##abruptly, they might create a shock to the real economy. Some comfort on the latter point could be taken from the relatively small percentages of loans collateralised against stocks and shares.##NewPara##The Committee considered the proposition that the impact of equity price movements could have been increased by wider share ownership. The number of individuals holding shares had been increased both by the recent demutualisations and by the earlier privatisations, but the aggregate value of direct holdings remained small. The value of equity held indirectly through pensions had significantly increased during the past decade. If equity prices fell sharply, future pensions paid out of defined-contribution schemes might be lower, and companies with defined-benefit pension schemes might have to make larger contributions, so that their shareholders might suffer. The Committee concluded that there was no simple relationship between asset prices and future inflation but it was essential to continue to review asset price developments.##NewTopic##Money##NewPara##The Committee discussed how to interpret the divergent money data: narrow money had decelerated but broad money, whether measured by M or Divisia money, had accelerated. The rise in narrow money velocity might be explained by the period of adjustment to a low inflation environment coming to an end, but it might also reflect a slowdown in consumer spending.##NewPara##The Committee noted the divergence between the bank and building society components of retail M. If the strong inflows into building societies had been encouraged by speculation about future demutualisations, then the resulting balances could perhaps be regarded as temporary investment rather than transaction balances. Bank staff were continuing to analyse the significance within M of OFIs  holdings but no new information had come to hand.##NewTopic##Labour market##NewPara##Discussion turned to the state of the labour market. The falls in unemployment continued to indicate tightening, although the pace had been exaggerated by the impact of the Jobseeker s Allowance (JSA) on the claimant count figures. This distinction did not directly affect unemployment as measured by the Labour Force Survey. Measured in this way, short-term unemployment was now lower than at any time since the Survey was first published in the early s. Business surveys and the Bank Agents  contacts continued to indicate tightening and skill shortages .##NewPara##This evidence, together with stable earnings growth, could be taken to imply that the rate of unemployment consistent with a stable rate of inflation was lower than previously thought. Job##NewPara##insecurity might have been a stronger factor; or inflation expectations might have been more subdued. But it was also possible that the growth in average earnings could suddenly increase as in the late s after a long period of stability. This remained an upside risk to the central projection for inflation.##NewPara##The Committee considered the alternative proposition that a significant degree of slack remained in the labour market. Hours worked per week, although rising over the last few years, remained below the peak of the late s; employment as a percentage of the working population showed a similar picture; and the inactivity rate had changed little since the recovery began. Such indicators might suggest that there was still potential to increase employment without reducing unemployment, in which case upward pressure on wages would be deferred.##NewPara##The Committee concluded that uncertainties remained about how much further tightening of the labour market could be tolerated without generating upward pressure on wages. It would be unwise in the current state of knowledge to take a strong view about the level of the natural rate of unemployment; but it remained essential to monitor closely wage settlements and average earnings.##NewTopic##Financial markets##NewPara##The Committee discussed the main market movements since the August meeting. The exchange rate had fallen, particularly against the DM, but the fall in the UK yield curve relative to that abroad immediately following the August meeting had since been reversed, so that changes in relative monetary conditions did not appear to have contributed significantly to the fall in sterling. The Committee discussed whether sterling s fall could be explained by changed views about the prospect for EMU. The chances of countries meeting the fiscal convergence criteria were perceived by the market to have increased, as continental economies recovered. Bond market data showed no evidence of a prospective high-inflation euro, but nor had they for some time. A more confident market view towards the euro may have lessened the attraction of sterling as a safe haven currency.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee agreed that the evidence over the last month did not point conclusively in either direction, nor resolve the main uncertainties. The upward revisions to industrial production suggested that GDP might have been a little higher in Q than earlier thought. The survey evidence on windfalls provided some reassurance that one of the upside risks to the Bank s central projection##NewPara##for inflation might prove less serious than earlier thought. There were uncertainties about the trend in house prices; whilst equity prices remained an upside risk although no more so than last month. There was no new evidence on the pace and impact of fiscal consolidation. The trade data continued to be stronger than expected, and their future deterioration remained uncertain. M remained a clear upside risk. The possibility that labour costs might suddenly accelerate sharply, as in the s, could not be excluded but equally some remaining degree of slack in the labour market could not be ruled out.##NewPara##In the light of the conclusion of the August Inflation Report, and the fact that the subsequent evidence did not point conclusively in either direction, the Committee voted unanimously to leave interest rates unchanged.