The world economy##NewPara##While some of the latest data from the United States were perhaps better than might have been expected, the overall prospect remained broadly in line with the central projection in the May Inflation Report. The manufacturing sector was now plainly in recession, with a fall of % in output between the fourth quarter of  and the first quarter of this year, and a further fall of .% in April. The National Association of Purchasing Managers  (NAPM) index had weakened again in May. Non-farm payrolls were , lower in May, though the data for April had been revised somewhat and now no longer showed the fall in services sector employment which had suggested that the downturn might already have spread beyond the manufacturing sector. The index of total hours worked in April and May was, at an annualised rate,  % below its average for the first quarter, suggesting that output might be weakening. By contrast, the news on consumption presented a rather stronger picture and was surprisingly resilient given the manufacturing downturn. Consumer confidence had improved somewhat, the housing market remained fairly strong and the fiscal##NewPara##package - which would inject between $ billion and $ billion into the economy this year - had been agreed by Congress. The effects of the reductions in official interest rates since the turn of the year were still to feed through fully to the economy.##NewPara##What these latest outturns might imply for the US outlook was less clear.  It was encouraging that a sharper slowdown had not so far materialised, though it remained an open question whether the slowdown in the information and communications technology (ICT) sector would persist and become more widespread. Leading indicators of investment remained weak and the falls in ICT investment could, if sustained, have implications for the pace of future productivity growth. The slowdown had, however, had only a modest impact so far on household spending. This might be because households would respond less than had previously been thought likely, or because it was taking longer than expected for them to react to the falls in equity wealth since last autumn and the weaker labour market more recently. Alternatively, the speed of the Federal Reserve s action in cutting interest##NewPara##rates could have been important in underpinning consumer confidence and so consumption: the slowdown in activity growth had been widely publicised, so it would be odd if consumers were to react to it only with a long delay.##NewPara##There were some indications that consumption growth might yet slow:   there was a slowing in   the momentum of retail sales growth, and some members pointed to various labour market indicators (including employment intentions surveys and the Help Wanted index) as suggesting further weakness ahead. And if consumption growth did not slow, the question remained of how long the imbalances in the economy could persist. The external and domestic imbalances could be sustainable if the increase in the rate of productivity growth proved to be robust. If it did not, there was a risk that any adjustments might happen abruptly. But they could equally take place gradually, over a number of years. The implications for the United Kingdom in the near term were therefore unclear.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the marked upward shift in yield curves in the past two months: yields  at ten year maturities, for example, had risen by  basis points in the United States (and by almost as much in many other major economies). A number of possible explanations were put forward. Most of this shift in expected rates had been at the two-year horizon and beyond, and so was consistent with a market view that the slowdown would not be as severe as had at one time been feared. But market expectations of inflation and views about the future stance of policy might also be part of the story. A second possibility, therefore, was that inflation expectations had fallen to implausibly low levels earlier in the year, so the shift in yields could to some extent be seen as a market correction rather than as news about the likely shape and extent of the downturn. The spread between corporate dollar bond yields and those on US Treasuries had narrowed recently, so the expectations implied by corporate yields had risen rather less strongly. This change in spread might in part reflect revised market expectations of the relative supply of corporate and government bonds, in the light of the planned tax cuts.##NewPara##Some members of the Committee suggested that the path of official US interest rates implied by the yield curve might be unrealistic, indicating as it did that rates would soon be cut to  % but would be increased to % by early next year. But it was noted by others that such a path was not wholly implausible. It would be consistent with a V-shaped recovery in which the authorities might need to support business and consumer confidence in the short run but then dampen any unwarranted optimism in the upswing, particularly if some of the earlier cuts had been as insurance against##NewPara##downside risks which in the event might not materialise.##NewPara##It was nonetheless encouraging that the more gloomy expectation which had brought about the earlier falls in yields were no longer the dominant market perception, and that this recovery in sentiment had been sustained. The dollar remained strong, stock markets had been broadly stable and forecasts for growth in earnings per share for US companies in  remained very buoyant.##NewPara##The news on developments in the euro area was rather less encouraging. Growth in the first quarter was slightly weaker than had been expected at the time of the May Inflation Report, and domestic demand in Germany was slowing more quickly than expected. The Purchasing Managers  Index for the euro area as a whole was now below  and almost as low as it had been in .##NewPara##The slowdown in Germany was essentially domestic in its origins and had until recently been offset by a relatively strong net trade position. But the German net trade position was now weakening too, reflecting the slowdown in world trade which was also affecting the outlook for exports elsewhere in the euro area. Of perhaps greater concern were the signs of weaker consumer and business confidence in France, and weaker estimates of euro-area growth in the second quarter. In addition, the increase in inflation in the euro area would begin to erode growth in real personal disposable incomes, which would weaken consumption growth. It might also limit the scope for monetary policy action to sustain demand. Resilient consumption had helped offset the effects of the US slowdown and underpinned the Committee s projection for the euro area. So for some members the recent news suggested that the downside risks to the euro-area outlook had increased.##NewPara##In Japan, the business sector remained weak and export volumes were substantially lower than a year ago. Signs of recovery there remained elusive.##NewTopic##Monetary and financial conditions##NewPara##Growth of all the main monetary aggregates in the United Kingdom was slowing. But the main feature of the recent data was the marked contrast between the strength of household deposits and borrowing on the one hand and the relatively weaker corporate sector aggregates on the other. Total household borrowing, for example, had increased by nearly % in the year to April. Corporate deposits had increased by only  % in the year to April, down from % last autumn, and the##NewPara##twelve-month increase in corporate borrowing from banks had slowed from a peak of nearly % in the third quarter of last year to just over % in April. This might appear to be consistent with a reversal of the recorded pick-up in investment growth in the fourth quarter: business investment growth in the first quarter had slowed, to .%. But much of the slowdown in investment growth could in fact be attributed to weaker-than-expected non-business investment. On the other hand, corporate borrowing growth was hardly low: it had simply fallen back from very high rates. At the sectoral level, borrowing in the first quarter had been concentrated in the services sector, real estate and construction: the manufacturing sector had in aggregate been repaying debt recently. So it was difficult to draw any clear conclusions about general weakness in the corporate sector from these data. And though the number of profit warnings was greater than a year ago, this increase was smaller so far in the second quarter than it had been in the first. The extent of the downward skew in equity prices had also lessened, suggesting that the markets now attached a lower probability to falls in equity prices from their current levels.##NewPara##Sterling was % higher in effective terms at the start of the Committee s meeting than it had been at its May meeting. This was however largely the result of euro weakness rather than of sterling strength: sterling had fallen to . against the US dollar. There seemed to be no convincing explanations for the dollar s continuing strength.##NewPara##The overnight fall during the meeting (of about %) in sterling s value might, it was suggested, be related to market speculation about the possibility of speedy moves towards a decision on UK adoption of the euro after the General Election. Such speculation could, members thought, continue and lead to greater exchange rate volatility in the months ahead.##NewPara##The Committee reflected on the recent robustness of house prices, notably as measured by the Halifax and Nationwide price indices and by the price balance from the survey carried out by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, and on the strength of the housing market more generally. The implications for the May Inflation Report forecast were unclear, because the DETR house price index on which it was based had risen rather less in the first quarter than had been assumed (so measured house prices might now be increasing faster, but from a lower level). Some members took reassurance from the fact that house prices were rising less fast in the southeast of England than in other parts of the country, as this implied that the latest increases at the aggregate level were the result of a return to more normal regional differentials rather than of a generalised pick-up in house price##NewPara##inflation. It was possible that the housing market could become a source of further concern, if low levels of mortgage interest rates were to prompt a renewed house price boom. The recent data suggested that housing market activity and gains in real housing wealth were at least as strong as had been expected at the time of the May Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##The financial markets attached little probability to a cut in interest rates this month and now expected that a low point would be reached in the third quarter. Implied interest rates at longer horizons had increased over the month.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##GDP growth in the first quarter had been revised up slightly, bringing it into line with the assumption made as the starting point for the projection in the May Inflation Report. It seemed possible that it might be revised further in that direction, as there was accumulating evidence that construction output had been growing more strongly than was yet reflected in the official data.##NewPara##But the first estimate of final domestic demand growth in the first quarter, of .%, was below expectations and was not easy to reconcile either with the published output data or with other information. Consumption growth of only .% in the first quarter, for example, was somewhat at odds with the strong growth in retail sales (up almost % year on year) and with car registrations data. Household spending on new cars in recent quarters might, however, be a misleading indicator of the underlying strength of this component of demand because of changes both to the pattern of sales during the year and to the share of sales accounted for by private purchasers. The strength of the housing market also suggested that consumption growth was stronger than was currently estimated. It was odd both that non-business investment should have fallen and - given output and other data - that investment should be so consistently strong across the manufacturing sector. It seemed reasonable to expect upward revisions to final domestic demand growth in the first quarter, largely matched by downward revisions to the contribution of stockbuilding to GDP growth, though some members thought that any revisions were still likely to leave estimated growth in final domestic demand below the level assumed in the May Inflation Report projection.##NewPara##The Index of Production data for April, which became available to the Committee during its meeting, showed a further fall in production, with manufacturing output falling even more than had##NewPara##been expected. The most marked fall was in the optical and electrical equipment sector.##NewPara##Looking ahead, surveys presented a mixed picture. The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) survey suggested that manufacturing output was falling, and the CBI survey that new orders were lower. Services seemed rather more robust, though the latest CBI/Deloittes survey showed falls in optimism in both business and - more markedly - consumer services. The CIPS survey for services had been weaker than for over  months.   It was possible that this might in part   be reflecting the impact of the foot and mouth epidemic on activity in the hotels sector.  The survey by the British Retail Consortium, though suggesting a stronger outlook, tended to sample larger stores, some of which might benefit disproportionately from any change in spending patterns as a result of the foot and mouth epidemic. Some members were also concerned by the latest reports from the Bank s regional Agents, suggesting that the weakness in manufacturing was spreading to services, and by the results of the Agents  special survey of stockbuilding which suggested that further falls in stocks were likely over the next six months. Taken by itself, this implied continuing weakness in output growth which was consistent with recent National Institute estimates and with some surveys.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##There was little news on the labour market. On the quantities side, employment continued to grow faster than the population of working age; and unemployment to fall, in part because participation in the labour market was increasing less rapidly than had been expected. Though the projections in the May Inflation Report embodied an expectation that the market would soon begin to turn, there were few signs in the data that it had yet started to do so. Recent survey information suggested a rather weaker picture, but was still uniformly stronger than the surveys  historical averages. From the limited historical evidence, it was not at all clear how a market in which the employment rate was falling would be reflected in these surveys. Vacancies data had fallen a little, but remained very high.  The latest CBI/Deloittes survey of the consumer and business services sectors showed that many firms, particularly in the latter sector, continued to report that staff shortages were a constraint on their expansion. In short, the labour market did not yet appear to be easing, although it might be tightening rather less fast.##NewPara##Consistent with this picture, the underlying pace of earnings growth seemed to have edged up a little since last summer. This was clearest in the growth of regular pay, which had picked up again##NewPara##after two months of slower annual growth, probably reflecting the higher level of regular pay a year earlier as a result of payments made for additional work over the millennium. Settlements too had turned out rather higher overall in the latest pay round than last year. If - as the output data suggested##NewPara##- the pace of growth was beginning to ease, then some easing in the labour market should in due course become apparent. That could in turn moderate the upward pressures on pay growth as well as affecting workers  perceptions of job security.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##The Committee noted that the price of oil had risen by about % since its previous meeting. There was little news in this about the prospects for the oil price, though the strengthening was perhaps consistent with market perceptions that the outlook for world activity was rather less weak than it had seemed a few months ago. The GDP deflator for the first quarter was rising somewhat faster. But this was volatile and subject to revision, so its quarterly movements were accorded little weight by most members in interpreting cost and price developments.##NewPara##Some members drew attention to the recent surveys of businesses  price expectations, which had weakened significantly: the CIPS services input and output price series were at their lowest levels since October  and the manufacturing input prices series below  for the first time since July  - despite the recent pick-up in oil prices. A year ago, price expectations had been higher yet had been followed by somewhat lower-than-forecast RPIX inflation outturns. So to the extent that these surveys were indicative of pressures in the pricing chain, these members argued that they pointed to benign outturns in the coming year.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##There was general agreement in the Committee that the news on the month was, on balance, limited and did not resolve the uncertainties which had surrounded the prospects for inflation in the United Kingdom for some months. The slowdown in the United States was so far a little less marked than had previously seemed possible, but it remained unclear - despite the recent more optimistic expectations reflected in financial market prices - how long it would persist or how rapid the recovery would be. Activity in the euro area was perhaps a little weaker than expected at the time of the May Inflation Report, and there were signs that consumer confidence there and consumption itself were##NewPara##now beginning to weaken.##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, there was still little evidence that household consumption growth was easing: indeed, it seemed more robust than for some months. So with slower output growth and falling production, especially in the externally exposed sectors, the imbalances in the economy - which had been apparent for some time - were likely to persist. RPIX inflation was somewhat below target and projected to remain so for some quarters. If the dampening effects on inflation of the slowdown in world activity and the strength of sterling were to persist, that would have implications for inflation further ahead. Policy action to offset these effects would, however, tend further to stimulate consumption and so to worsen the imbalances. These could then prove more problematic for the control of inflation in the medium term. That was a key policy dilemma.##NewPara##Against this background, most members felt that there should be no change in the repo rate this month. The news from the United States suggested that the risk of a significantly worse outcome than was included in the May Inflation Report projections was somewhat less than it had been,##NewPara##though it remained possible that the slowdown could be more prolonged than was currently projected. A range of factors provided these members with varying degrees of comfort about the prospects for the US economy: the latest US employment data and revisions to previous months suggested that job losses were slowing and were more concentrated than previously thought in manufacturing;  the faster de-stocking now recorded in the first quarter could be consistent with a shorter-lived downturn; and the slowdown had so far had only a limited impact on the household sector. The financial markets now appeared to be less gloomy about the prospects than a few months ago. This change in market expectations was consistent with the latest data and to that extent seemed well-founded, though for some there were oddities in the implied path of official rates over the coming year. Some of these members were not yet convinced that a relatively early recovery of activity in the United States was the most likely outcome and regarded an investment slowdown as more likely to be associated with a slower recovery. If a worse outcome began to materialise, however, it would be possible for policymakers to react. Offsetting this somewhat more encouraging US prospect were the rather weaker-than-expected outturns in parts of the euro area. On balance, these members felt that the overall prospect for world activity was little changed on the month.##NewPara##Domestically, too, there was little in the latest data which justified a change in the repo rate. The news on the month was mixed. UK final domestic demand growth in the first quarter had turned out##NewPara##below the expectation embodied in the May Inflation Report and recent surveys were rather weak, suggesting a second quarter outturn that might also be below that projection. The sectors most exposed to the slowdown in world activity, to the strength of sterling and to the consequences of the foot and mouth epidemic were weak, but most of the non- tradeable sectors were robust. This apparent weakness in overall output growth contrasted, however, with the continued strength of consumption. This was reflected in strong growth in retail sales and relatively rapid growth in household borrowing, and underpinned by a pick-up in the housing market. The labour market remained tight and there was some evidence that underlying earnings growth had edged up a little since last summer. Employment prospects seemed unlikely to dampen consumer confidence.##NewPara##Looking further ahead, this strength of consumption growth and of sterling were sources of concern, as they would add to the imbalances in the economy. A further reduction in interest rates could bring inflation more quickly back to target, but it would at the same time tend to exacerbate these imbalances and so pose risks for the inflation outlook in the medium term. The uncertainties about both the current state of the economy and the possible risks to the outlook from the imbalances were sufficient to justify waiting for more information about how domestic demand would evolve.##NewPara##On another view, the outlook for the UK economy remained weaker than the central projection in the May Inflation Report and the inflation outlook more benign. A reduction of , rather than , basis points had been justified last month, so a reduction of  basis points was warranted without##NewPara##any further news. In fact, the news on the month was slightly on the downside. Rapid recovery in the United States was by no means assured and the recovery in financial markets  confidence was from a very low base. There was no evidence of inflationary pressures in the US economy: capacity utilisation and price survey balances were falling and wage pressures were moderating. The financial markets now seemed to believe that the current investment-led downturn might be short-lived, but confidence in such an outcome was not encouraged by historical experience. The prospect for the euro area was also becoming a source of concern, with weakness now spreading beyond Germany and both business and consumer confidence in several euro-area countries showing signs of weakness. Domestically, the forward-looking indicators were weaker than expected.  The UK services sector seemed weaker than for some time and the special survey on stock levels conducted by the Bank s regional Agents suggested that further de-stocking was in prospect. Forward-looking evidence on pricing suggested that businesses  price expectations had softened, and import prices in the first quarter were below expectations. While underlying earnings growth had strengthened and echo effects might keep earnings growth high in the near term, the likely impact of falling RPI##NewPara##inflation on settlements and of weaker profits on bonuses should lead to weakening earnings growth later in the year. Consumption growth and the housing market were both stronger than expected and represented a key upside risk to the outlook. But overall, the news on the month was modestly on the downside.  A further cut in rates was still justified, to help to achieve the inflation target in the   medium term.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. Eight members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, David Clementi, Christopher Allsopp, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Stephen Nickell and Ian Plenderleith) voted for the proposition. Sushil Wadhwani voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.