The world economy##NewPara##Recent information about the world economy, particularly that from the United States, was again encouraging. The estimate of US GDP growth in the fourth quarter of last year had been revised up, to##NewPara##+.%, and corporate profits had recovered sharply on the quarter. Output of the information and communications technology (ICT) sector had started to increase and inventories might no longer be falling. Retail sales in January and February suggested a continuing strong contribution from consumption, though they might have eased in March; and consumer confidence had improved sharply on both main survey measures. All this suggested that activity in the United States was indeed recovering rapidly. The Consensus forecast for growth in  was now over %, whereas only two months ago it had been below %.##NewPara##The Committee, in reviewing the US recovery and the factors underlying it, noted the speed of the turnaround in the position of, and prospects for, the ICT sector. This was reflected also in the strength of production of ICT goods elsewhere   for example, in Korea and Taiwan   and suggested that the close economic links which had been evident in the downturn would similarly characterise the recovery. The United States had also benefited from a larger, and perhaps more predictable, stimulus from both monetary and fiscal policy, the effects of which were now clear to see (notably in household consumption). Output growth of over % per annum was still believed by many commentators to be sustainable there, so   given its recent level   a return of output growth to trend would be consistent with a stronger recovery in the United States than elsewhere.##NewPara##There were, nonetheless, unresolved questions about the sustainability of this recovery, at least at the pace seen in recent months. While expected future interest rates in debt markets had risen, the equity market had responded very little to the strong data and survey indicators: it might be that the recovery had been anticipated in equity markets, and so was already reflected in equity market prices. In addition, the recovery in corporate profits in the fourth quarter had been from a very low level, and##NewPara##was associated with cost-cutting in the wake of the slowdown and also the terrorist attacks in September. Profits were still by no means strong. There was little sign of a pick-up in investment, which would be important for the sustainability of recovery, and it was not yet clear that the latest data reflected any more than the final stage of the inventory cycle. Consumption growth, though it had so far remained resilient, could falter given the accumulating debt burdens, particularly if asset prices were to fall. Over the past six months, consumption growth had been sustained, in part, by tax cuts and mortgage refinancing. Both factors were likely to be less supportive over the rest of this year.##NewPara##An additional concern, both for the US recovery and for the prospects for world activity and inflation more generally, was the strengthening of around % in oil prices over the past two months. They had now returned to levels seen before the attacks in the United States last September and, if they remained at these levels or continued to rise, would both increase inflation and reduce real incomes, which could lower consumption growth, thus slowing the recovery. Oil prices had increased much more than other commodity prices, which suggested that the recent movements were mainly supply- driven; and the tensions in the Middle East meant that prices could remain high. On the other hand, there was still significant excess capacity amongst OPEC producers and additional demand could   and, given some producers  revenue needs, probably would   be accommodated.##NewPara##By contrast with the evidence of recovery in the United States, the immediate outlook for the euro area and Consensus forecasts for the region were little changed. GDP had fallen a little in the fourth quarter, following weak growth in the third, and there were important differences within the euro area in the second half of last year, with output, for example, lower in Germany but higher in France and Spain. Survey indicators, though again generally stronger, continued to point to a slower recovery than in the United States, and the current market forward curve also implied a rather less rapid increase in euro-area official interest rates. This was consistent with growth in the euro area having fallen less far below trend. It was likely that   as in the downturn   the euro area would lag any US recovery and that recovery there would need largely to be export-led. Measures of core inflation in the euro area were also continuing to edge higher, despite the slowdown in activity growth last year.##NewPara##The economic news from Japan was mixed: despite some more positive signs, the latest Tankan survey results had been disappointing.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##Money and credit data continued to reflect the differences between the positions of the household and corporate sectors. Household borrowing grew by .% in the year to February, continuing its acceleration since early last year. Mortgage loan approvals, and household debt to income ratios, were also up again, while the growth of household money holdings had moderated. The annual rate of house price inflation, as measured by the Halifax and Nationwide indices, was about % in February, and the price expectations balance in the survey by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors remained high. All were consistent with survey evidence of consumer optimism and with the continued strength of consumption growth.##NewPara##The strength of house prices was the most notable feature of these data, and contrasted with views a year ago that house prices would continue to decelerate. One possible explanation was that this largely reflected the cash flow effects of lower interest rates: the reductions in rates during  had had marked effects on measures of affordability and allowed households to take on higher levels of mortgage debt for the same nominal servicing cost. This could relax the credit constraints which were faced by some households when nominal interest rates were higher, and so might support a higher equilibrium ratio of house prices to earnings. Alternatively, even if the higher level of debt might not be sustainable in the long run, it would take time for households to learn that the real cost had not fallen to the same extent. It was, however, not clear whether this provided a complete explanation, nor whether such nominal debt servicing effects would persist. The money markets already discounted an increase in official interest rates, which had to some extent been reflected in the cost of fixed rate mortgages. There was no sign that this had affected house prices, although the interest rate on new two-year fixed-rate mortgages was only about  basis points above its recent low, and so was still significantly below its average over the past five years. Nevertheless, there was little evidence of unusual levels of borrowing at very high loan-to-value ratios, or of distress. The ratio of house prices to earnings was not yet unduly high by historical standards. Competition amongst mortgage lenders had in addition increased the availability of mortgages and improved the terms on which they could be obtained.##NewPara##By contrast with this buoyant household sector picture, corporate money and credit indicators suggested little change in corporate activity. Corporate deposit growth continued to increase, but growth in lending to corporates had been slowing.##NewPara##Inflation expectations implied by the market prices of conventional and index-linked gilts had risen noticeably at all maturities. Survey information on shorter-term expectations, however, did not fully corroborate this market-based measure and it seemed probable (despite the similar changes in US rates) that the extent of the rise reflected technical factors rather than a genuine change in the market s inflation expectations. But such measures of inflation expectations, in the United States and United Kingdom alike, had for some time appeared to be more volatile than was readily explicable in terms of underlying economic fundamentals.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##Revised data on GDP last year showed a pattern of expenditure which was now more consistent with survey and other evidence. There was on the one hand persistently strong consumption growth and a strengthening contribution from Government spending, and on the other consistently weak business investment.  The level of GDP at factor cost   on which the measure of pressure of demand on capacity in the Committee s forecasting model was based   had however been revised down and was now estimated by the ONS to have been about . percentage points lower in the fourth quarter of last year than in the Committee s central projection at the time of the February Inflation Report. Much of this revision to the level of GDP had been in the most recent quarters, and so was less likely to contain news about the economy s sustainable level of potential output than would revisions to earlier data. How it should be interpreted would be an important issue in the coming forecast round.##NewPara##Despite the apparent worldwide recovery in ICT output, it was difficult to find evidence in the data that there had yet been a corresponding recovery within manufacturing activity in the United Kingdom: manufacturing output had fallen in each quarter last year, and by a further .% in January; and that latest fall had been more than accounted for by a fall of more than % in output of the  electrical and optical engineering sector, which should be among the first to benefit from a worldwide ICT recovery. Survey evidence was more encouraging and there were signs of improvement in manufacturing orders. To the extent that these surveys were qualitative and so did not give sufficient weight to the scale of the output movements in the electrical and optical engineering sector, however, this evidence might be giving false comfort. And whereas investment data had previously suggested a sharp fall in business investment in the fourth quarter, which would have been consistent with a more rapid recovery in the early part of this year, the revised data showed a flatter profile and might therefore imply a correspondingly shallower recovery.##NewPara##Elsewhere, construction activity was buoyant. There had been a downward revision to services output growth in the second half of last year, but survey evidence from the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) and from the CBI suggested that services activity was growing strongly again and that optimism in financial and business services was also recovering. While retail sales had risen sharply in February, the three-month growth rate had eased though the twelve-month growth rate had not done so. Consumer confidence had weakened a little.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Conditions in the labour market remained surprisingly benign. Unemployment was rising less strongly than the Committee had projected in February (if at all, on the claimant count measure) and there had been little change in the inflows into unemployment, which were still below the average of last year. At the same time, earnings growth was rather weaker than projected and was currently well below last year s levels. This was accounted for by two factors: first, the rate of growth of regular pay per head had eased, driven in large part by falls in paid overtime and in average hours; second, there was a substantial negative contribution from bonuses, substantial in part because the share of bonuses in overall pay was well above average at this time of year.  Pay settlements too were rather lower than a year ago. If unemployment remained low and activity picked up, average hours   and with it, regular pay per head   could recover quite quickly. The size of the bonus contribution should also fall, even if the rate of fall of bonuses itself did not ease, as the main bonus season passed. But it was difficult to judge the likely implications of a recovery in nominal earnings growth for prices, as productivity growth had also been very weak in recent months. It was plausible that productivity would recover as activity picked up and any hoarded labour was again used to its full potential.##NewPara##One suggested explanation of these outturns was that remuneration arrangements had become more flexible in recent years. Bonuses were now a more important component of pay and, if they were more responsive than regular pay to changes in corporate profitability, it would be reasonable to expect that there would be more volatility in hours worked and in earnings per head, and less in heads employed. Others noted, however, that greater labour market flexibility could also be associated with lower hiring and firing costs, which would suggest greater variability in numbers employed in response to shocks. There was a marked contrast, too, between this UK experience and the substantial labour shedding in the United States in response to the downturn in demand. It was surprising that inflows to unemployment had not picked up here. This suggested either that announced redundancies had not yet been implemented, or that they were not in fact large relative to recruitment elsewhere in##NewPara##the economy. There was also widespread evidence of on-the-job searching by, and outplacement assistance to, those about to be made redundant. So some job losses might not be manifested in unemployment at all.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Annual inflation in February on the RPIX measure had reversed more than half of its sharp rise in January, illustrating again the extent to which measured inflation was susceptible to short-term volatility which had little relationship with underlying inflationary pressures in the economy. Other measures of inflationary pressure, such as domestically-generated inflation and the GDP deflator, and measures of retail prices which excluded volatile components or tax effects, differed quite widely from each other and from the targeted measure.  And, as with any measure of inflation, RPIX itself depended on the particular measures of the prices included in it. The housing depreciation component, for example, was based on the DTLR index of house prices. This frequently differed substantially from other possible measures of house prices. All this illustrated the familiar point that it was necessary to look through small differences in measured inflation and to ignore its month-to-month volatility, in order to assess the extent of underlying inflationary pressure.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The Chancellor was to present his Budget on  April and the Committee would as usual be briefed on it by Treasury officials shortly in advance. Its implications for output and inflation would be considered fully in the context of preparing the projections for the May Inflation Report.##NewPara##The pattern of market interest rates, and surveys of market opinion, indicated that there was very little market expectation that the Committee would decide to change the repo rate this month.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee agreed that the recovery in the United States was emerging more quickly and more strongly than could reasonably have been expected six or even three months ago. Earlier hopes of recovery in the latter part of  had been put back, in the wake of the terrorist attacks of##NewPara## September, to at best the first half of this year. That hoped-for recovery now seemed already to be established. Sentiment was improving globally as a result, and forecasts of growth this year were##NewPara##being revised upwards. The downside risks to the world economy in the near term had become much less acute, and the overall world outlook was as encouraging as could have been hoped at the time the Committee s projections were agreed for the February Inflation Report.##NewPara##Nevertheless, sustained recovery   even in the United States   was by no means yet assured. Though the turnaround in ICT output, and the bounce-back in US corporate profits, were encouraging, it was still possible that they simply reflected the inventory cycle. The level of corporate profits was still weak.   There was little sign so far of a recovery in investment and this would be important to  future growth prospects. And earlier concerns about the imbalances in the US economy and how they might be corrected remained relevant to the medium-term outlook.##NewPara##One particular concern was the strengthening in oil prices in the past two months, and the recent resurgence of tension in the Middle East. Were oil prices to continue to rise, there could be significant dampening effects on global activity further out. To this extent, despite the more reassuring outlook for this year, the upside risks to inflation and the downside risks to the world outlook in  had increased. A further uncertainty was the outlook for the euro area, which was more directly relevant for UK external demand than was activity in the United States. Though sentiment in the euro area had improved as the US outlook had strengthened, the data did not as yet show evidence of much improvement there.##NewPara##In the United Kingdom too, the news on the month was mixed. Consumption growth remained strong and continued to underpin demand. Leading indicators such as household credit and house prices remain strong, and unemployment had picked up less than had been expected. But the strong rise last year in real post-tax wages was unlikely to persist, as the beneficial effects of past tax changes and improvements in the terms of trade would unwind and pay settlements were now lower than a year ago. In addition, to the extent that the rapid increase in durables purchases represented a stock adjustment reflecting households  perceived improvements in permanent income, their contribution to consumption growth was likely to ease, though it was difficult to be confident about when this might happen. Income gearing remained moderate by historical standards. All agreed that the case for increasing interest rates in order to restrain consumption growth was not yet pressing.##NewPara##The level of GDP at factor cost in the fourth quarter of last year was now estimated by the ONS to be significantly lower than projected in the February Inflation Report, and only .% higher than in the fourth quarter of the previous year. On its own, this would, if interpreted mechanically, imply a##NewPara##rather weaker inflation projection, as it suggested that there was a larger margin of excess capacity in the economy than had previously been thought. The reliance that should be placed on this GDP figure, given the inevitable uncertainties surrounding early estimates and the factor cost adjustment, was however limited and it would need to be reviewed carefully alongside other evidence in preparing the projections for the May Inflation Report. Forward-looking surveys of business activity were encouraging, but investment had fallen steadily through  and investment intentions had so far shown only modest increases. Members agreed that, while manufacturing output might be about to recover, there was not yet conclusive evidence that it had begun to do so.##NewPara##Domestic inflationary pressures remained subdued, despite the fact that the labour market had eased rather less than had been expected.  It remained an open question how that market would respond as activity growth started to pick up: some members detected signs that, despite recent easing, pay pressures were building again and would increase as some of the other factors which had boosted the growth of the real consumption wage began to ease; others suggested that recent labour hoarding provided scope for productivity to recover as demand increased, though the extent of that slack remained to be seen. The net implications for unit wage costs, and so for inflationary pressures, were far from clear.##NewPara##For some members, recent news taken as a whole added some weight to the arguments for an increase in rates, though it was by no means decisive; most, however, took a more neutral view.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.