Financial markets##NewPara##Over the past month, movements in interest rates had been small. Short-term sterling interest rates were barely changed on the month, while short-term dollar and euro rates were around##NewPara## basis points lower. Forward rates now implied that an increase of  basis points in the Bank s repo rate this month was widely expected and largely priced into the yield curve. Forward interest rates also suggested that market participants now expected official euro-area and US rates to be increased a little later than had been anticipated at the time of the January MPC meeting. Long spot interest rates were little changed on the month in the United Kingdom and a little lower in the United States and the euro area, with the bulk of the falls accounted for by changes in expectations about near-term interest rate prospects. Changes on the month in the major equity price indices around the world had ranged from an increase of .% for the DJ EuroStoxx to a fall of .% for the Topix, with the FTSE All-Share index dropping by .%.  Uncertainty about future equity prices appeared to be below average in the United Kingdom and elsewhere.##NewPara##Exchange rates had been volatile during the past month. Overall, since the previous MPC meeting, the euro had depreciated by around  % against the dollar, and the sterling effective exchange rate index had risen by  %, touching its highest level since February last year   at nearly % above its value at the beginning of . It seemed likely that sterling s appreciation reflected market participants  expectations of a repo rate increase in February and the positive news about UK domestic demand growth in the past couple of months. It was also possible that, in the light of fears of renewed dollar weakness and slow domestic demand growth in the euro area, sterling assets had become relatively more attractive to international investors.##NewPara##Comparing interest rates with their levels in November, the sterling, dollar and euro yield curves were all lower. Over that period, there had been a more marked fall in long-term forward rates in the United States than elsewhere, perhaps associated with hedging activity in the US mortgage-backed securities market. These falls in yield curves were difficult to explain in terms of news about demand and output, as that had been broadly positive since November. It was more likely that market participants had reassessed the probable actions of the monetary authorities. In the United States, the FOMC statement published in December had been widely interpreted as implying that US rates would remain low for some time. This interpretation might also have suggested that interest rates elsewhere in the world would be lower than previously expected, as a result of the likely impact of US interest rates on exchange rates against the dollar. In the##NewPara##United Kingdom, the MPC s November inflation projections and the subsequent MPC minutes might have led market participants to conclude that the sterling yield curve immediately after the November repo rate increase implied a greater degree of monetary tightening than would in fact be necessary.##NewTopic##The international economy##NewPara##Evidence of a more broadly based recovery in the world economy had continued to accumulate. In the United States, quarterly GDP growth had been % in  Q, according to the advance estimate. As expected, this was below the rate of growth in the third quarter, but still strong, and had probably been affected by erratically low government spending. Investment growth had slowed on the quarter and had been a little weaker than expected, but the overall picture of a broadly based revival of investment was still intact. Output indicators had been consistent with continuing robust growth, with the twelve-month growth rate of industrial production rising in December, the Institute for Supply Management s (ISM s) manufacturing Purchasing Ma nagers  Index (PMI) in January at its highest level since December  and the ISM no n-manufacturing PMI increasing sharply. Although the stock of broad money had fallen again in December, its velocity remained well below the rates prevailing in the late s. The Federal Reserve s most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey suggested that credit conditions for corporate borrowers had eased while those for households had tightened a little, thus counteracting to some extent the past imbalance between investment and consumption growth. Total bank lending to large and medium-sized firms had risen, slightly, for the first time since . Indeed, banks had reported that companies were finding it easier to raise internal funds and to borrow from outside the banking##NewPara##system, so the bank lending data probably underestimated corporate spending growth. Consumption growth had, as expected, fallen in the fourth quarter, as growth of spending on durable goods had slowed. Consumers ma y have been cautious because of uncertainty about job prospects: contrary to market expectations, non-farm payrolls had barely increased in December. However, the household-based employment survey, which might be better at capturing jobs created in new firms, painted a stronger picture, and new and continuing unemployment claims had continued to decline. Consumer confidence measures had rebounded in January, mortgage refinancing had picked up and surveys of activity in the housing market had remained strong, so it seemed likely that household spending would hold up.##NewPara##The sustainability of the US recovery this year now seemed less in question, given the continuing expansionary policy stance and the weaker US dollar. It was, however, unclear when inflationary pressures might begin to emerge. On the one hand, productivity growth was still rapid and there appeared to be a substantial margin of spare capacity in both product and labour markets; inflation on the core consumer expenditures deflator measure was falling; and forward interest rates did not suggest that market participants were expecting inflation to rise significantly in the medium term. On the other hand, non-oil commodity prices had increased by around % in dollar terms in the past six months or so and input and output producer price inflation had been picking up.##NewPara##The larger price rises for those components of the US Consumer Prices Index omitted from the  core  measure, such as food and energy, might reflect the strengthening recovery of world demand rather than temporary factors. It was also unclear whether the large US current account deficit would continue to be financed by inflows on the capital account without further falls in the value of the US dollar. These uncertainties entailed some risk that US long bond yields might rise significantly.##NewPara##The latest estimate of GDP growth in the euro area in  Q was .%, unchanged from the previous release. Data revisions had reduced but not eliminated the puzzle of the apparently strong contribution of net trade in the third quarter despite the strength of the euro. Indeed, one possible explanation   that producers had been reducing their margins in order to maintain sales volumes   now looked less plausible in the light of upward revisions to the estimated export deflator.  But trade data for October and November suggested that there had in any case been a reduction in the value of exports from the euro area in the fourth quarter, and it seemed unlikely that net trade would continue to drive the euro-area recovery. Estimates of euro-area GDP growth in the fourth quarter##NewPara##were not yet available, but German data for  as a whole implied that Q GDP growth there was likely to have been around .%.  The IFO index (for western Germany) had risen a little in January, because of a rise in the  current situation  component, which was consistent with growth continuing in  Q.##NewPara##Economic indicators suggested that there might be greater strength to euro-area corporate spending than to consumption. Growth of French household consumption of manufactured goods had slowed in Q and German retail sales (excluding sales of motor vehicles) had contracted at a faster rate than in Q; the latter had fallen about % from their peak in . The latest IFO index for retailers pointed to continuing weakness. Euro-area consumer confidence had been unchanged in January, remaining below its long-run average. But, although industrial production growth had weakened in November, probably because of the effect of the warm weather on energy production, the euro-area manufacturing PMI had increased in January for the seventh consecutive month;##NewPara##the services PMI had risen by even more on the month.##NewPara##In Japan, the all-activity index had fallen a little in November, but the broad picture of an increase in growth from around the middle of last year was intact. China continued to provide a significant impetus to world demand, with GDP in  Q estimated to have been around % higher than a year earlier. It seemed unlikely, on current evidence, that avian flu would have a large or lasting effect on Asian economies.##NewTopic##Money, credit, demand and output##NewPara##The past month s news about UK activity had generally been positive. According to the preliminary estimate, GDP growth at market prices in  Q had been .%, the strongest quarterly figure since  Q, and broadly in line with the MPC s November central projection. Business surveys had been consistently positive in their messages about the likely strength of demand and output in  Q: the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply s (CIPS ) services business activity balance had suggested that activity had increased at its most rapid rate since mid-; the British Chambers of Commerce quarterly survey showed sharp improvements in sales and orders balances for both the manufacturing and services sectors; the CBI quarterly Industrial Trends survey had reported a marked and broadly based improvement in the prospects of the manufacturing sector, and the largest increase in the output balance since the survey began; and##NewPara##the CIPS manufacturing PMI had stayed in January at a level not seen since December , with a sharp rise in new orders offset by a sharp fall in stocks, some of which was probably involuntary and so consistent with strong demand. The Bank s Agents had reported that manufacturing orders and output continued to improve and that growth in services output was still gathering pace.##NewPara##Given these indicators, which reflected actual activity as well as expectations, it was likely that GDP growth in  Q would exceed that in  Q.  There had also been a sharp rise in reported investment intentions in both services and manufacturing; according to the Bank s Agents, these were around their highest level for three years. The CIPS manufacturing index for new orders for investment goods industries had been above  for three months now, the highest level since August . This suggested that firms  confidence in future demand had risen significantly; and there might also be a backlog of postponed investment projects in the pipeline.##NewPara##The signs were that household spending remained robust. Retail sales growth in  Q had been .%, the strongest quarterly growth rate since  Q, although, as usual, there was considerable uncertainty about the pattern of spending around Christmas and hence about the implications for retail sales at the beginning of the new year. Consumer confidence had risen slightly in January, according to the GfK measure, on a seasonally adjusted basis. The CBI Distributive Trades survey for January had shown the highest balance of retailers since April  reporting annual growth, although reports from the Bank s Agents suggested that volume growth had been driven to a large extent by relatively high price discounting for the time of year. Interpretation was complicated by the shift of spending towards supermarkets and internet retailers with lower prices. Total lending to individuals had remained robust in December, because of the strength of secured lending. Unsecured lending growth, which had slowed over  as a whole, had dropped sharply in December, reflecting strong repayments of credit card debt, possibly influenced by the expiry of low-interest rate offers. The monetary aggregates were consistent with continued resilience of consumption. Indicators suggested that there had been little change in the housing market in December. The rate of increase of house prices had remained strong that month, according to the average of the rates reported by the Halifax and Nationwide; loan approvals and particulars delivered had been little changed; and, according to the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, the ratio of sales to stocks on estate agents  books had risen slightly. House price inflation had not slowed as much as the Committee had expected last November.##NewPara##Aggregate consumption last year had been buoyed by increases not only in housing and financial wealth but also in the total benefits paid to the household sector, which were unlikely to rise as fast again this year, and by increases in employment. Also, HM Treasury was projecting a rise in effective tax rates over the coming year.##NewPara##The Bank s Agents reported that their contacts regarded domestic demand in foreign markets, rather than exchange rates, as the dominant influence on exports at the moment; the strongest markets were said to be in the United States and Asia, despite sterling s appreciation against the US dollar and the Asian currencies linked to it. Nevertheless, the margins of UK exporters to these regions were likely to be compressed by the appreciation, which might slow future export growth.##NewTopic##The labour market, costs and prices##NewPara##Recent data and surveys were consistent with a gradual tightening in the labour market since around the middle of last year. Employment had increased (although total hours worked had fallen slightly), and, on the Labour Force Survey measure, the unemployment rate had fallen to .% in the three months to November. The CIPS employment survey for January was little changed on the month, still indicating modest private sector employment growth; the Recruitment and Employment Confederation demand and availability measures for agency staff both pointed to further tightening; and the Agents  contacts painted the same picture for regional labour markets.##NewPara##The annual growth rate of regular pay in the private sector rose slightly in November.##NewPara##The annualised three-month-on-three-month growth rate was now one percentage point above its low point last year. Wage drift   the difference between pay settlements and earnings growth   seemed largely to have disappeared, but it was likely to return this year; bonuses in particular were likely to make a positive contribution to earnings growth. The Bank s Agents had conducted their annual informal survey of contacts  expectations for the coming pay round, and this suggested that pay settlements would be at levels similar to those in , although non-wage labour costs were expected to rise faster, largely because of pension contributions and, over the year as a whole, higher National Insurance contributions. Difficulties in recruiting new labour had been cited more often than last year as an important factor in employers  attitudes to pay bargaining. However, given the recovery in aggregate demand, it was perhaps surprising that there had not been more##NewPara##reports of labour shortages. It was possible that labour supply   including that from overseas   had become more responsive to changes in vacancies and pay.##NewPara##CPI inflation had been .% in December.  Goods price inflation had been picking up for some time, with increases across most components of the index, while services price inflation had fallen, largely because of lower prices for package holidays. There was some evidence of growing inflationary pressure in the supply pipeline. Twelve-month producer input price inflation had risen to .% in the second half of last year, propelled by commodity prices, which had risen in sterling, not just US dollar, terms. This had been corroborated by the input price component of the manufacturing PMI. Although  movements in commodity and other input prices did not have a close relationship with changes in the Consumer Prices Index, the rises were indicative of the general upward pressure on prices from the broad-based recovery in global demand. There was also some evidence that UK corporate services inflation had been rising during .##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##A rise in the official repo rate was widely expected. Out of  economists polled by Reuters in the week before the meeting,  expected the rate to be increased. The mean probability attached to a  basis point increase was %.##NewTopic##The February GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections published in the##NewPara##The Committee s central projection, based on the assumption of an official repo rate of .%, was for the growth rate of GDP at market prices to pick up at the beginning of , giving a somewhat stronger near-term profile than the central projection in November. Thereafter, growth was likely to moderate to a rate broadly similar in the second year to that projected three months earlier. The Committee s central projection was for CPI inflation to increase gradually towards the % target over the next two years. During , some factors, such as planned utility price increases, would make temporary positive contributions to the overall inflation rate. Domestic inflationary pressures were expected to rise throughout the next two years and were likely to be##NewPara##stronger than expected last November, although their impact on prospective CPI inflation would be mitigated by the higher sterling exchange rate incorporated in the latest projection. Domestic pressures would be accompanied towards the end of the period by the impact of increasing world import prices. At the two-year horizon, on the central projections, CPI inflation would be around##NewPara##. percentage points below RPIX inflation.##NewPara##The Committee noted various risks surrounding these central projections. With respect to the world economy, uncertainty remained about whether the large US current account deficit would trigger a further fall in the US dollar, weakening the outlook for UK-trade-weighted world demand. But the Committee judged that the downside risk to external demand for UK output had diminished since November. With respect to the UK economy, there was an upside risk to consumption growth and house prices in the near term, with a corresponding downside risk at some later date; there was an upside risk to pay, given the slowdown in employees  real take-home income last year;  and there was uncertainty about the current and prospective levels of potential supply.##NewPara##Overall, the Committee regarded the risks to the central projections for both GDP growth and CPI inflation as broadly balanced. There were relatively small differences in view amongst members of the Commi ttee about both the central projections and the balance of risks around them.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Compared with the outlook in November, and consistent with the news in the past month, near-term prospects for US growth now seemed to be more assured, Asian economies were strengthening and there were clearer signs that the euro area was beginning to recover. The world recovery was, in short, becoming more broadly based, though the outlook in UK-trade-weighted terms was only marginally stronger than in November. The prospects for UK aggregate demand had strengthened, primarily as a result of the strength of domestic demand, particularly the unexpected resilience of household consumption. That would increase prospective inflationary pressure. However, potential supply in the UK economy appeared to the Committee to be a little higher than previously thought and, because of data revisions, the estimated level of GDP at basic prices was a little lower, so that the amount of spare capacity in the economy at the beginning of the forecast period was a little larger than previously expected and inflationary pressure##NewPara##correspondingly lower. And the rise in sterling s effective rate since November would also tend to reduce inflationary pressure.##NewPara##Against that background, and in the light of the MPC s new forecast for GDP growth and CPI inflation, members of the Committee identified a number of arguments in favour of increasing the repo rate this month. Members attached different weights to these arguments but, taken together, found them to be persuasive. First, the forecast suggested that, on the central projection for CPI inflation, a small increase in the repo rate was necessary to bring inflation back to the##NewPara##% target by the two-year horizon. The projected acceleration of activity in the first quarter, consistent with the latest survey evidence, meant that the margin of spare capacity in the economy was likely to be eroded quickly. Also, the risks around the GDP projection were now balanced rather than slightly to the downside. It would be appropriate, in the light of prospective demand growth, to withdraw some of the stimulus that the monetary policy stance was currently giving the economy. This was broadly consistent with the implication of November s forecast, that interest rates were likely to need to rise gradually to keep inflation close to target in the medium term.##NewPara##Second, a decision to maintain the repo rate at this meeting, when an increase in the rate was widely expected by financial market participants, might lead to a fall in the sterling exchange rate, thus removing a key factor offsetting the increased inflationary pressure from prospective domestic demand growth. Third, in the view of some members, it could be argued that it was appropriate to look through the first-round impact of the rise in sterling s exchange rate on prices, treating it as a  one-off  downward shock to the price level which should be disregarded in setting interest rates. It should be treated as an offset to domestic inflationary pressure only if it affected subsequent wage and price setting behaviour. In any case, the rise in sterling s exchange rate might turn out to be temporary.  Committee members also noted that a  basis point increase in the repo rate now would be consistent with a cautious approach to adjusting rates, given the current uncertainty about the impact of rate rises on household spending against a background of unusually high ratios of debt to income.##NewPara##The Committee also noted several arguments for delay. First, CPI inflation was at present significantly below target and, on the central projection, would remain below it for most of the next two years. Second, although there were signs that price and unit labour cost increases earlier in the supply chain were edging up slowly, as yet they had had little impact on retail prices, and inflation expectations were well anchored to the inflation target. Third, there was a risk that potential supply##NewPara##might be higher than on the MPC s central projection. If so, inflationary pressures might be slower to emerge. But the Committee did not find these arguments persuasive, as it was important that policy should be, and be seen to be, forward-looking, reacting to the prospective pressure of demand on supply capacity and the inflationary pressure associated with it, not simply to the current inflation rate. Also, the Committee had judged that, overall, the risks to the central projection for inflation were broadly balanced.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be increased by  basis points to .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.