The world economy##NewPara##On balance, recent news suggested that the recovery in the United States was strengthening, supported by expansionary fiscal and monetary policy, although there remained downside risks. GDP was reported to have risen .% in  Q   somewhat more than expected in financial markets, although less than the Committee s projection at the time of the May Inflation Report. Increases in government defence spending accounted for much of the rise in demand, but there had also been an unexpectedly large increase in business investment, with spending on machinery and equipment growing particularly strongly. Despite the depreciation of the dollar, however, export volumes had fallen.##NewPara##Data about firms  output and orders were consistent with a pick-up in growth. Factory output rose in June, and new orders of non-defence capital goods increased a little. The Institute for Supply Management s Purchasing Managers  Indices (PMIs) strengthened in July, the manufacturing index rising from . to . and the non-manufacturing index from . to .; the latter had now risen by a striking  points in the past three months. US corporate earnings had been improving, and the indications were that this was not primarily because of cost-cutting. Increases in corporate revenues would encourage investment. The increase in the output of the information, communications and technology (ICT) sector and the rise in the prices of both silicon chips and IT companies  shares were also consistent with planned increases in the pace of investment.##NewPara##The pace of US growth in the second half of the year would depend on the prospects for  consumer spending as well as whether the acceleration of investment persisted. The substantial tax cuts in the pipeline would help to sustain the growth of disposable income. Mortgage refinancing and equity withdrawal, which had helped to fund robust consumption growth, were thought to have slowed, probably in response to the turnaround in mortgage interest rates, and were likely to fall further as the most recent changes in the market yield curve fed through into those rates. The labour market news had been mixed. The unemployment rate fell in July, and the trend in initial unemployment claims had been gently downwards recently. But non-farm payrolls had fallen for six consecutive months, and there had been a sharp drop in the labour force in July, unwinding nearly all of the increase the month before. Indicators of consumer confidence also gave a mixed message. The University of Michigan measure rose slightly in July, reflecting an increase in the  current conditions  index. But the Conference Board measure fell, with a large drop in the component reflecting expectations. That may have reflected concerns about employment conditions, as a smaller proportion of respondents described jobs as  plentiful  or expected there to be more jobs in the next six months.##NewPara##There had been less news about the economy of the euro area; what little there was had been consistent with, at best, sluggish recovery. The estimate of growth in  Q had been revised upwards slightly, to .%. Few data were yet available for demand in the second quarter as a whole, but French consumer spending on manufactured goods was reported to have weakened compared with the previous quarter. Euro-area industrial production fell by .% in May, and exports of goods were about % lower than a year earlier in nominal terms, suggesting that the appreciation of the euro had been affecting producers; however, German manufacturing export orders were up in June. The European Commission measures of business confidence for the three largest economies and for the euro area as a whole fell in July, although the German IFO index increased slightly and the euro-area PMIs showed a slight improvement in business conditions. There was also a small rise in the European Commission measure of consumer confidence.##NewPara##The data for Japan were also mixed. Industrial production was reported to have fallen slightly in the second quarter, but business and consumer surveys pointed to a modest improvement in the outlook. Elsewhere in Asia, the economies affected by the SARS epidemic appeared to be recovering; according to the most recent data, industrial production had been accelerating in China, Korea and Taiwan. The increase in US orders for high-technology goods was likely to help.##NewPara##Overall, then, the picture was one of a gradual recovery in world demand, largely driven by the United States and non-Japan Asia. But that pattern of activity implied that there were still global imbalances, of which the most significant was the size of the US current account deficit. That imbalance could lead to a range of macroeconomic outcomes, some of which posed downside risks to the global outlook. When the US stock market had reached its peak, two views of how such global imbalances might unwind had been discussed by the Committee. According to the first, the rapid productivity gains associated with ICT would spread from the United States to the rest of the world. That would encourage the growth of consumption and investment outside the United States, a rise in global real interest rates, and hence a slowdown in US consumption and investment. According to the second view, US firms and consumers would realise that their expectations of future productivity growth had become over-optimistic, and that they had accumulated more debt than was warranted by likely future growth. The resulting balance sheet adjustments would be associated with slower growth in US domestic demand.   The second scenario would imply weaker global demand than would the   first. In both cases, the US current account deficit would be likely to diminish.##NewPara##There was little evidence yet for either scenario. Trend productivity growth in the United States, which had increased in the s, did not appear to have fallen back. However, there was little sign as yet of productivity growth increasing significantly in the rest of the world. Although US firms seemed to have concluded with hindsight that they had over-invested and needed to repair their balance sheets, spending growth by households remained relatively robust, and a rapid increase in the fiscal deficit had offset a decline in the financial deficit of the US private sector as a whole. Thus the current account deficit had persisted. It had been sustained without a sharper fall in the dollar because of foreign investors  appetite for US dollar assets. There were two main risks in this conjuncture. First, foreign investors might not be willing to continue to accumulate dollar assets at the same pace as in the recent past. For example, the central banks that had been building up their dollar reserves in the wake of the Asian debt crises of the late s might decide that their reserves were now adequate. If foreign demand for US assets were to fall sharply, so too might the dollar. That might have an adverse impact  on UK-export-weighted world demand, in particular because of the likely impact on the euro area.##NewPara##The net impact on the demand for UK exports was, however, uncertain, as it would depend on whether and how much sterling depreciated against the euro. Second, there might yet be a change in US households  expectations of growth in disposable income, if, for example, the employment rate continued to fall. A sharp slowdown in consumption growth could not be ruled out, especially if it had been sustained until now by falling interest rates and increasing fiscal deficits: there were limits to the##NewPara##extent to which such easing could continue. But it was difficult to judge how likely it was that these risks would materalise over any given time horizon;  hence the implications for current UK policy were unclear. In any case, even if they were to crystallise, they might be offset by other developments, such as a pick-up in domestic demand elsewhere in the world.##NewTopic##Financial markets, money and credit##NewPara##The sharp rise in the US government bond yield curve over the past month   roughly half a percentage point across maturities from two to thirty years   suggested that participants in financial markets had revised upwards their estimates of likely future growth. The proximate triggers appeared to have been Chairman Greenspan s testimony to Congress on  July and, more recently, the encouraging GDP data. To the extent that the shift in the yield curve reflected well-founded expectations of higher growth, it was not necessarily a matter for concern.  However, it was possible  that interest rates had overshot to some degree, as a result of increased Treasury bond selling and swap market activity by mortgage lenders and holders of US mortgage-backed securities, who needed to adjust their risk profile as a result of the initial rise in rates. This hedging activity had probably amplified the moves in medium- to longer-term US yields, but it was not clear how long it would   affect their level. Nevertheless, it was likely that market conditions contributed to the increase in the expected volatility of US interest rates implied by option prices.##NewPara##The main news from UK financial markets over the past month had been the sharp rises in   sterling wholesale market interest rates. Around the ten-year point of the yield curve, interest rates had increased by around  basis points on the month   a substantially smaller move than in the United States. But at the short end of the curve (one-year maturities), interest rates had moved up by around  basis points, somewhat closer to the size of the US rise. The change in the euro yield curve was similar to that in the sterling curve. There appeared to have been a marked change in the expectations of market participants about the likely path of short-term interest rates around the world, based presumably largely on their assessment of the implications of the recent data for global activity and, possibly, a re-appraisal of the outlook and tactics of the Federal Open Markets Committee. It was also possible that there had been some spillover from the dynamic hedging activity in US markets, although the impact on longer-term rates outside the United States did not seem to have been as large.##NewPara##Recent exchange rate and equity index movements had been less dramatic than those of market interest rates. Sterling s effective exchange rate was a little lower than a month earlier by the time of the Committee s meeting, having moved around somewhat in between; it had traded in a range some -% below its level at the beginning of the year. UK stock price indices had risen, the##NewPara##FTSE All-Share a little and the  small cap  indices somewhat more.##NewPara##The growth rate of broad money had remained strong in June, and M lending growth to public non-financial companies (PNFCs) and to households   both secured and unsecured   was robust. Nevertheless, income gearing had been flat over recent quarters.##NewPara##The rapid growth rates of lending to individuals, which had helped to maintain consumption growth, could not be sustained indefinitely. There was a risk that households were extrapolating forward the unusually high rates of growth of real disposable income of recent years, and that consumers might not have fully appreciated that inflation would not reduce the real burden of debt as quickly as it had in the past.   But the rate of growth of lending did not by itself imply that current  levels of aggregate household debt were themselves necessarily unsustainable or imprudent, or that no further increase in the aggregate ratio of debt to income was warranted. Some increase in debt relative##NewPara##to income was to be expected during a temporary economic slowdown, to enable households to smooth their consumption over time, sustaining spending in line with expectations of trend income growth.##NewPara##And, over the longer term, demographic changes were working to increase the demand for housing and hence for mortgage debt, relative to the population of working age: there was a trend towards smaller##NewPara##  and hence more   households, and the proportion of the population in owner occupation had risen significantly in the past couple of decades and was likely to rise further.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The preliminary estimate of GDP growth in the second quarter had been .%, somewhat lower than expected. The latest industrial production data showed stronger-than-expected growth of output in manufacturing and energy sectors, and the apparent weakness in non-distribution services had not been evident in business surveys. Hence it was possible that the preliminary estimate might be revised up slightly. Expenditure measures pointed in a similar direction: they were, overall, rather stronger than on the output side. The evidence about demand and output might be reconciled by a run-down of inventories or an increased trade deficit.##NewPara##The indications were that consumption growth had picked up in the second quarter. Retail sales increased by .% in June, giving a growth rate of .% for  Q as a whole. The June figure was surprisingly strong. In contrast, the surveys by the CBI and the British Retail Consortium suggested slowing annual retail sales growth in June. Measures of consumer confidence had edged up further; individuals  borrowing growth had remained resilient; the unusually warm weather in the second quarter might have stimulated spending, as suggested by many of the Bank s Agents  contacts; and private car sales had been strong. House prices increased a little more rapidly in July (giving a three- month growth rate of .%, averaging the Nationwide and Halifax data), so house price inflation might be slowing less than expected; the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors price expectations balances, including those for London and the South East, moved up; and loan approvals for house purchase rose.##NewPara##Overall, although the rate of consumption growth was likely to have halved between the second half of last year and the first half of this, it did not now appear to be slowing quite to the extent that the Committee had expected at the time of its May projections. But the underlying determinants of consumption still pointed to a slowdown. Compared with recent years, employment growth was unlikely to be as rapid, the terms of trade were no longer improving, and the real tax burden had increased because of the rise in National Insurance contributions and in Council Tax. All these factors were likely to continue to contribute to a slowing in the growth of real disposable income. The pace of increase of housing wealth was likely to fall, and remain slower for some time, because even if the equilibrium ratio of house prices to earnings had risen, the actual ratio was now likely to be above it, requiring house prices to rise less quickly than earnings for a while. Households would be able to borrow further to finance consumption for a while, but at some stage the growth of their financial liabilities relative to income would limit their spending. The downside risks were two-fold. First, stronger consumption now might be followed by a longer-than-expected period of slower growth as consumers repaired their balance sheets; that risk was greater if past growth rates had been predicated on unrealistic views as to the longer-term prospects for real disposable income. Second, the increased stock of household debt might mean that household spending would fall more sharply in the event of an adverse shock, such as an unanticipated fall in house prices or a worsening of the terms of trade or global demand.  But, unlike in many past household credit booms, there was little prospect at present of sharp increases in interest rates.##NewPara##The outlook for business investment remained one of modest recovery. An informal survey of contacts by the Bank s regional Agents had suggested that, on average, businesses planned to increase their investment spending over the next twelve months. The pattern of responses varied across industry, with respondents in services excluding distribution more likely to increase spending. The most important factors stimulating investment were reported to be the prospects for UK demand and the improved financial situation of many firms, not least because of lower borrowing costs. Spending plans focused in particular on IT and buildings. Other surveys of investment intentions had been mixed, with the July CBI manufacturing survey remaining pessimistic, but the British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) manufacturing and services surveys showing some modest improvement since the previous surveys in April, although reported investment intentions were still weak by historical standards. Investment tended to be volatile, and it was possible that the recent weakness in plans to invest could be reversed if firms had been postponing replacement investment and now tried to address their backlog. But one counterpart to the recent revisions in trade data might be that the financial position of the corporate sector was worse than had been thought. That would point to a somewhat slower recovery in investment spending.##NewPara##Business surveys differed on the prospects for output in the third quarter. Balances remained negative in the CBI s July Industrial Trends Survey and the BCC surveys were weak as well. But the output components of the July CIPS Purchasing Managers  Indices suggested a stronger recovery   close to trend in Q.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Labour market activity and increases in earnings had been broadly stable. According to the Labour Force Survey (LFS), employment had increased by some , over the three months to May and the employment rate had reached .%, its highest level since . The CIPS employment survey suggested that there had been a further easing in the rate of private sector job losses. But total hours worked had been little changed, as the share of part-time work had continued to increase and full-timers  average hours to fall. That could have reflected the relaxation of constraints on workers  choice of hours, allowing more to opt to go part-time, or labour hoarding by employers during a cyclical slowdown; a reversal of the trend was more likely if the latter were the case. By historical standards, a very small proportion of part-timers reported that they would have preferred full-time##NewPara##work, so this shift at least was probably primarily a supply-side phenomenon, and represented a structural reduction in hours, which was unlikely to be reversed.##NewPara##Headline annual earnings growth rose somewhat in May, with a smaller negative effect from bonuses than in April but slower regular pay growth. Settlements did not seem to have compensated for the marked rise in inflation since late  measured by the Tax and Prices Index. The differential between public and private sector earnings growth had narrowed, but it was still nearly two percentage points. There were several possible explanations of why private sector pay had not responded more to relatively rapid public pay growth. First, and most obviously, the differential in growth rates might simply reflect the reallocation of labour from the private to the public sector, given the planned increase in provision of public services. In that case, overall pay pressure was more relevant to assessing inflation prospects than were developments in pay in individual sectors. Second, the ratio of public to private sector pay might have been below its long-run equilibrium, following public sector pay restraint since the early s, so the differential in growth rates might reflect catching up by public sector workers. There was some evidence that there had been a decline over the s in the premium paid in the public sector, even allowing for differences in the respective workforces. Third, pay per head in the private sector might be weaker because employers had been reducing average hours worked, in response to the recent slowdown; that lowered pay per person. Fourth, there might be long lags, in which case there would be more pressure on private sector labour costs in the next pay round. Hence it was difficult to predict what would happen to those costs, which were an important input to inflation forecasts. A further factor complicating the assessment of aggregate wage pressures was the absence of a reliable measure of earnings per hour of labour input. In general, though, cost pressures from the labour market seemed muted.##NewTopic##Costs and prices##NewPara##Input prices fell by .% in June, the fourth consecutive monthly fall, with a rise in oil prices offset by falls in the prices of home-produced foods, fuel and imports. Output prices (excluding duties) also fell by .%.##NewPara##RPIX inflation eased to .% in June, below the level that the Committee had expected at the time of the May Inflation Report. Some components, notably leisure services (especially foreign holidays), had again been slightly on the weak side. This most likely reflected the fall in oil prices##NewPara##earlier in the year and factors specific to the sector concerned, although any such series of apparently idiosyncratic downward shocks to inflation could be indicative of a more general reduction in underlying inflationary pressure. In line with pre-release arrangements, an advance estimate of the RPI was provided to the Governor   working days ahead of publication; this suggested that the slight weakening in retail price inflation had been partly reversed, with annual RPIX and RPI inflation likely to have been .% and .% respectively in July. The short-run outlook was for RPIX inflation to remain around recent levels into August and then fall in September, as a result of a smaller contribution from housing depreciation and the unwinding of some of last year s temporary factors.##NewPara##HICP inflation was expected to remain broadly flat over a similar period. The differential with RPIX inflation was likely to fall as the housing depreciation element in the latter subsided.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The Committee noted that all of  economists polled by Reuters predicted that there would be no change in the repo rate this month. The mean probability they attached to  no change  was %. Money market interest rates also suggested that the probability of a change in the policy rate was judged to be low.##NewTopic##The August GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections to be published in the##NewPara##Based on the assumption of an unchanged official repo rate of .% over the next two years, according to the central projection, GDP growth would rise marginally above the long-run trend rate by early next year, and would then ease back to around trend in    the broad picture was similar to that outlined in the May Report.  The central projection for twelve-month RPIX inflation was for it to fall in the coming months, dipping below target around the turn of the year and later creeping up during the second year of the projection to around target by the two-year forecast horizon. Relative to May, inflation was likely to be a little weaker over the next - months but, following the reduction in the repo rate in July, the medium-term outlook was little changed. In the Inflation Report fan charts, the overall balance of risks around the central projections for GDP growth was judged to be on the downside over the next two years; the risks to the central projection for RPIX inflation were evenly##NewPara##balanced in the first year but a little on the downside in the second year. There were some differences among the Committee about the most likely path for inflation and the overall balance of risks, but the spread of opinion was small.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##On balance, there had been positive news about the US economy over the past month, although there were downside risks to consumption, particularly from the labour market. This suggested that there had been a slight improvement in the international environment, even though there was as yet little evidence of a change in the prospect of at best a sluggish recovery in the euro area and Japan. In the United Kingdom, output in Q had turned out weaker than expected, according to the preliminary GDP estimate, but consumption had been stronger than expected. The imbalance between components of domestic demand growth continued. There was still a risk of a sharp rise in household saving to restore consumers  financial positions, and weaknesses in corporate balance sheets might hold back investment growth for longer than expected. But the size of these risks was difficult to assess, not least because of the lack of comprehensive and up-to-date data on the distribution of financial assets and liabilities. Private sector pay pressures appeared little changed.##NewPara##The Committee considered what level of interest rates was appropriate in the light of the outlook for activity and RPIX inflation. The central projections to be published in the August Inflation Report suggested that, after the previous month s reduction, no change in the repo rate was necessary, but it was important to consider the balance of risks around the central projections. Members differed to a certain extent in their assessment of these risks. However, they all concluded that a change in the repo rate this month was not warranted.##NewPara##Various arguments could be put forward for a further reduction in the repo rate, but they were not persuasive. First, it could be argued that there were, on balance, downside risks to demand. In particular, US and euro-area growth might not pick up as rapidly as anticipated;  evidence of a recovery in UK investment was still sketchy; UK consumers might be cautious about further rises in spending; and the recent movement in market interest rates might slow borrowing more than expected. But some of the downside risks to demand had diminished recently. For example, the UK housing market had not slowed abruptly as some had feared.  Second, RPIX inflation was projected to be below target during much of the second year of the forecast period, so that there appeared to be some##NewPara##scope to bring UK output more quickly towards its long-run potential. But, with inflation on the central projection forecast to be rising through the target in two years time, it would be imprudent to  try to offset a modest undershoot earlier in the second year of the forecast. In addition, in the view of some members, a reduction risked triggering an acceleration of consumer spending and an even larger rise in household debt. That would, in the opinion of some members, reduce the Committee s flexibility to deal with any future adverse shocks. Finally, an immediate reduction, given that it would not have been expected by market participants, might, some argued, trigger a fall in the exchange rate which could push inflation further above the target at the two-year forecast horizon.##NewPara##Similarly, the argument for an increase in the repo rate was not convincing. Some upside risks to domestic demand might have increased: retail spending and the housing market had been surprisingly strong recently, and investment might rise more rapidly than allowed for in the forecast given the prospects for output growth and a backlog of replacement investment requirements. However, against this, there was little direct evidence that households were over-optimistic about the level of spending that they could maintain in the long run; consumption growth and house price inflation had after all slowed significantly since last year. Credit conditions had already been tightened as a result of the upward movement in market yield curves, and this was likely to dampen borrowing. The level of interest rates continued to imply that the policy stance was accommodating. At some stage, this expansionary stance would have to be moderated. But, on the central projection, inflation would be below target for much of the forecast period, which suggested that a rise in rates was not yet   appropriate.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.