Financial markets##NewPara##Short-term interest rates were around  basis points higher on the month in sterling markets, unchanged in US dollar markets and around  basis points lower in euro markets. The weak##NewPara##US non-farm payrolls data for February and the Madrid bombings had triggered falls in rates, but the strong US payrolls data for March had led to increases. Sterling short-term interest rates had also moved upwards after the strong UK retail sales data were released and in response to public remarks by various MPC members during the month. In the euro area, speculation about the likelihood of a future cut in the ECB s official rates had affected market rates. Longer-term nominal sterling and euro interest rates were slightly lower. Real US dollar interest rates had first fallen, touching their lowest level since Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities had been launched, but then had more than reversed those falls in response to the March payrolls data.##NewPara##The biggest exchange rate movements during the month had been associated with the yen, which had appreciated by  % in effective terms, probably because market participants were anticipating reduced foreign exchange intervention by the Bank of Japan. The US dollar effective exchange rate was around % weaker on the month, largely reflecting the movement of the US dollar against the yen. The effective exchange rate for sterling was slightly higher on the month, with depreciation against the yen offset by modest appreciation against the euro and US dollar. This left the sterling effective exchange rate index some % above the fifteen-day average level taken as the starting point for the exchange rate projections in the February Inflation Report.##NewPara##With the notable exception of the Topix, major equity markets had fallen a little over the month. This was difficult to account for in terms of real interest rates - ten-year spot real rates had fallen in the United Kingdom and the euro area - or prospects for corporate earnings, which, on the basis of surveys of investment analysts, had probably improved. Markets had reacted sharply to the terrorist attack in Madrid, and it seemed possible that equity prices were reflecting perceptions of increased geopolitical risk. That was consistent with the fact that the attack had triggered equity price falls across most industry sectors. Also, option prices suggested that the risk of significant falls in equity market indices was being given more weight than before.##NewPara##Equity price-earnings ratios (using a trailing average of corporate earnings) were still around their average levels since , and above their longer-run historical averages. But the period since  included a period of exceptional stock market strength. Together with the low level of bond yields and spreads (notably for emerging-market and high-yield corporate debt), that posed the question of whether financial assets were collectively becoming overvalued, implying a risk of a future correction and an adverse shock to wealth and the cost of capital. Market anecdote suggested that a  search for yield  was giving rise to increased activity in the markets for a wide range of fixed-income securities, driven in part by the need for some financial intermediaries to meet guaranteed nominal returns on some of their own liabilities. The US yield curve might also have been affected by the high demand for US Treasuries from official institutions in Asia. These points suggested that the risk of a sharper-than-expected change in yields at some stage was skewed to the upside, and hence the risk to asset prices skewed to the downside.##NewTopic##The international economy##NewPara##News during the past month about the international economy had been mixed, but the global economic recovery still seemed to be developing broadly as expected.##NewPara##In the United States, the latest estimates for GDP and expenditure in  Q had left estimated GDP growth unrevised at % on the quarter. Data for  Q suggested that growth had been robust, but probably a little weaker than the Committee had expected at the time of the February Inflation Report. On the output side, industrial production had increased rapidly in January and February.##NewPara##New orders had continued to pick up, and the Institute for Supply Management s headline indices for both manufacturing and services had risen in March   the latter reversing its fall in February, reaching##NewPara##its highest level since the series began in . Corporate profitability had continued to rise and the share of profits in GDP was at its highest since . However, consumer spending growth had been lower in January and February than the Committee had expected, and consumer confidence had not risen significantly in March, after a sharp fall in February.##NewPara##Uncertainty about labour market prospects might have been affecting US consumer confidence. But there had been a very strong increase of , in non-farm payrolls in March   well above market expectations. This data series was erratic, but the March figure offered some reassurance that employment would expand at the pace necessary to be consistent with the MPC s February projections, and would help to sustain consumer spending. Some of the increase reflected one-off factors such as the end of a grocery workers  strike and a weather-related rise in construction employment, but these probably accounted for only a relatively small share of the total increase.##NewPara##There had also been substantial upward revisions of the payrolls data for January and February. The data were now more in line with the stronger upward trend in the employment data from the household survey over the past twelve months. However, job growth was still muted by the standards of past economic recoveries and monthly increases of around , had been necessary in the past just to keep the unemployment rate constant.##NewPara##US consumer spending was likely to be supported by the rapid increase in house prices as well as somewhat improved job prospects. Tax rebates during the first half of this year might also have an effect, although a recent survey by the National Retail Federation suggested that many people were planning to use the refunds to add to their savings or to pay down debt.##NewPara##In the euro area, GDP growth in  Q had been .%, according to the first release (unchanged from the flash estimate), somewhat lower than the MPC had expected at the time of the February Inflation Report. However, final domestic demand had been broadly in line with the February projections: the surprise had been the speed at which the large positive net trade contribution in  Q had unwound.   On the data available so far, the recovery this year seemed fragile: although industrial confidence was slightly above its long-run average in March (unchanged on the month) and the manufacturing PMI had increased slightly, the services PMI had fallen for the second month running and the German IFO index had fallen below its long-run average for the first time since last October. Although the sharp increase in retail sales in January had not been fully unwound in February, consumer confidence was unchanged in March, remaining below its long-run average.##NewPara##The growth rate of euro-area consumption was weaker than expected in Q. Its recent sluggishness was something of a puzzle. It could not be explained easily by the behaviour of real incomes, or by wealth and the other variables usually used to explain the behaviour of consumption. One possible explanation was increased precautionary saving. That might be explained by concerns about the impact on job security of proposed structural reforms in several European countries, and about the implications of projected fiscal deficits for pension entitlements and taxes. These concerns were unlikely to disappear quickly, so consumption growth might be muted for some time. Investment growth seemed to have picked up in Q, but that partly reflected increased residential investment in Germany, in anticipation of the removal of tax subsidies in January this year. In a longer-term perspective, the euro area seemed to have been suffering from past over-investment in some sectors such as German construction.##NewPara##In contrast to the euro area, Asian economies had been reporting strong growth. Real GDP growth in Japan had been .% in  Q, according to the second estimate, well above the Committee s expectation in February. The latest Tankan survey suggested that there had been a further improvement in confidence in the corporate sector. Elsewhere in Asia, notably China and India, growth had also been robust.##NewTopic##Money, credit, demand and output##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, estimated GDP growth in  Q had been unrevised in the National Accounts, at .% at market prices and .% at basic prices. Revisions to earlier data had more or less reversed the increase in the estimated level of Q GDP discussed by the Committee last month, so the Committee s February assessment of the pressure of demand on supply at the beginning of  remained valid.##NewPara##As far as output was concerned, the only new data were for manufacturing. Manufacturing output was reported to have fallen .% in February and the estimate for January had been revised downwards. The fall had been broadly based across industry subsectors. Business surveys, however, had pointed to a continuing recovery. The CIPS index for manufacturing output had been well above the  mark in February (despite dipping slightly from January), and had remained so in March.##NewPara##The CBI Industrial Trends survey had also been strong. The reports of the Bank s regional Agents, although a little less upbeat than business surveys, had also suggested that conditions had been##NewPara##improving. It was possible that the February manufacturing data were a rogue observation; the series was more volatile than were business survey measures, and was prone to revision.##NewPara##Data revisions had helped to resolve past puzzles on the demand side. The GDP revisions indicated that consumption growth had been slightly weaker in  Q and investment growth somewhat stronger than previously thought. Together with revisions to back data, this implied that the level of business investment in Q had been around % higher than expected at the time of the February Inflation Report. The ratio of business investment to GDP had drifted upwards throughout . The share of profits in GDP had been increasing and the rate of return in the non-oil corporate sector was at its highest level since . Combined with most of the evidence on investment intentions, this suggested that the prospects for investment were improving.  However, there were some contrary indicators. A special survey carried out by the Bank s Agents suggested that investment between mid- and mid- would be rather muted compared with the previous year, although it also suggested that investment was primarily intended to raise productive capacity. And, according to the CIPS index, new orders for investment goods had weakened significantly between January and March.##NewPara##Consumption growth in the first quarter had been robust, judging by the strong retail sales data; the estimate for retail sales in January had been revised up sharply. Motor vehicle registrations had been high. The growth rates of notes and coin and of broad money had remained broadly steady, and the growth rate of total borrowing by individuals was still strong. But there was some tentative evidence that consumer spending might have moderated during the quarter: the CBI Distributive Trades survey suggested some easing in March, consumer confidence had fallen slightly, and unsecured lending had dropped back a little in February. Despite those signs, household spending seemed likely to remain buoyant in the near term, and might also be supported by the strength of the housing market. The average of the Halifax and Nationwide indices had risen by over % in the three months to March. House price inflation now looked as if it had been picking up since the middle of last year. The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors had reported an increase in the ratio of house sales to stocks in March, the ninth consecutive increase, and the RICS backward- and forward-looking house price balances had risen. The lending data also suggested that the housing market remained strong; the twelve-month growth rate of secured lending to individuals had risen slightly in February.##NewPara##The behaviour of house prices posed a problem for the assessment of the likely path of consumption. First, house prices had risen faster than expected for some time. Second, it was unclear what the implications were of higher-than-expected house prices for household spending in these circumstances.##NewPara##There were two possible, not mutually exclusive, explanations for the rises in house prices. First, the equilibrium house price-earnings ratio might be higher than the Committee had thought, even though the Committee had revised its estimate upwards significantly in . There were good reasons why that ratio might have risen, but it was necessarily very uncertain. Low interest rates had reduced the cost of borrowing and the burden of  front-loading  of repayments; the growth in the number of households was outstripping a constrained supply; and there was some evidence that the equilibrium demand for housing as an investment asset   in particular, as a means of saving for retirement   might have risen. Second, prices might have been driven up by expectations about the size and persistence of future price increases. Even if some of the price increases were unsustainable, however, they need not reverse suddenly;  they might instead unwind gradually.  That would depend on whether a change in behaviour was triggered by some external shock to the household sector and,##NewPara##if so, on the nature of that shock. The experience of other countries that had had rapid house price increases did not offer clear guidance: in some countries, such as the Netherlands and Australia, house prices had slowed but not fallen, whereas in Hong Kong and Japan they had dropped considerably below peak levels.##NewPara##If house prices did follow a higher trajectory over the next year or so than the Committee had previously expected, that would not necessarily imply that consumption need be markedly stronger. That would depend on the strength of the causal link from house prices to spending via higher collateral for credit-constrained households. It was notable that the growth rate of consumption in nominal terms had not been particularly rapid over the past couple of years or so and the saving rate had been broadly stable, despite the strength of the housing market during that period.##NewTopic##The labour market, costs and prices##NewPara##The labour market had been strengthening recently. The employment rate in the three months to January had been . percentage points higher than in the previous three months, according to the Labour Force Survey, and the unemployment rate . percentage points lower. The LFS data now##NewPara##showed the buoyancy of employment already evident in the Workforce Jobs data and survey measures of employment intentions. But average hours had continued to fall. The fact that average hours had continued to drop while GDP growth had been picking up was consistent with an explanation in terms of structural factors, including the increased importance of part-time employment. It was possible that average hours would continue to drift downwards, but the prospects for labour supply also depended on whether participation rates increased.##NewPara##Overall earnings growth in January had risen by . percentage points, with a large contribution from bonuses; some of the rise probably reflected a shift in the timing of bonus payments from December and February to January. The growth rate of regular pay in the private sector had edged up, and the real cost of labour to employers for the economy as a whole had been rising a little faster than before. But faster productivity growth meant that unit labour cost growth had fallen slightly.##NewPara##The overall picture was consistent with the outlook at the time of the February Inflation Report.##NewPara##CPI inflation had been .% in February, slightly lower than expected. Goods prices were no longer falling and the gap between goods and services price inflation had narrowed. This was despite the likely impact of recent sterling appreciation on the prices of imported goods and the continuing productivity growth differential in favour of goods production. Inflation pressures in the supply pipeline were muted. Although the input price balance from the CIPS manufacturing survey had reached its highest level since July , the ONS measure of input price inflation had remained subdued. It was possible that the ONS measure covered a greater range of inputs than did business survey respondents: for example, the official data included the prices of imported parts and equipment such as electronic components and office machinery parts and accessories, which   in contrast to the prices of many raw materials   had been falling. Oil prices had risen sharply in US dollar terms,##NewPara##but sterling s appreciation this year would offset some of the impact, as would the postponement of higher fuel duty.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##According to the most recent Reuters poll, of the  economists surveyed,  expected a##NewPara## basis point increase in the repo rate this month and  expected no change. The mean probability attached to a  basis point increase was %. Respondents were unanimous that if the repo rate were to be left unchanged this month, it would be raised in May. The mean expectation of the repo rate at##NewPara##the end of  was now .%, a rise of  basis points over the past month.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##There had been no uniform pattern to the news during the past month. The world economic recovery appeared to be on track, although the picture was patchy. US indicators for the first##NewPara##quarter   with the exception of the latest non-farm payrolls data   had perhaps been a little softer tha n expected, but Asian indicators had been stronger. Growth in the euro area so far this year, although less robust than elsewhere, had probably been broadly consistent with expectations at the time of the February Inflation Report. Sterling had strengthe ned since the Report and UK output data had been weaker than expected. But the labour market had continued to tighten gradually and the housing market had been unexpectedly robust. There was considerable uncertainty about the past and future impact of ho using market developments on consumption and aggregate demand. The November and February repo rate rises had not had a noticeable impact on either consumer spending or confidence.##NewPara##The Committee s February inflation projection at constant interest rates had indicated that##NewPara##CPI inflation was likely to be rising at and beyond the two-year horizon. The broad economic outlook had not changed very much since then: it seemed likely that the economy was still growing above trend and there was not much spare capacity. But that analysis did not by itself imply that a repo rate rise was necessary immediately.##NewPara##There were, however, a number of arguments for increasing the repo rate this month, to which different members attached different weights. First, some downside risks to inflation had diminished. The first rises in rates since February  did not seem to have had a disproportionate effect on household consumption and borrowing so far, so the argument for caution, which had seemed persuasive in November, now appeared less relevant. Also, for some members, the latest US non-farm payrolls data were an indication that the downside risks to US consumption growth had diminished. Second, a rise this month would not be a major surprise in financial markets, so there was less danger of triggering an upward shift in the sterling yield curve or effective exchange rate.  Third, a rise in rates now might help to discourage unsustainable rates of house price inflation. That would address an upside risk to consumption in the near term and also reduce the risk of a sharp correction to the housing market and to consumption later. Were such a correction to take place, that might pose difficulties for the Committee in keeping CPI inflation close to the % target. One member put##NewPara##particular weight on possible future complications for the Committee arising from the increased vulnerability of the household sector to shocks due to the continuing increase in its debt relative to disposable income to historically high levels. That member also argued that the still-high growth rate of secured and unsecured debt pointed to continuing robust consumption growth in the near term.##NewPara##There were also several arguments for maintaining the current repo rate this month.##NewPara##First, altho ugh it would be appropriate to withdraw some of the monetary stimulus in due course, it did not at present appear necessary to raise rates faster than the profile implied by the market yield curve in February. The February projection on the market interest rate assumption had suggested that inflation would undershoot its target at the two-year horizon, and would be unlikely to exceed it by a significant amount further out. Since February, UK-weighted world demand prospects had weakened slightly, but the strengthening UK housing market had raised prospective consumption and aggregate domestic demand growth. Offsetting this had been the rise in sterling, which had not fallen back towards its level at the beginning of the year and hence warranted more weight this month than last.##NewPara##Taken together, those factors suggested little change to the February inflation projection. For some members, certain downside risks to inflation had increased. For instance, euro-area domestic demand showed little sign of increasing at the pace that would be necessary by the second half of the year to be consistent with the Committee s projections. Geopolitical risks to world demand might also have increased. Second, although the current inflation rate was below the target, interest rates had already been increased in anticipation of rising inflationary pressures. The fact that inflation expectations remained firmly linked to the target reduced the risks of delaying any further move in rates.##NewPara##The Inflation Report next month would provide an opportunity to evaluate the mixed economic news and reconsider some of the unresolved economic issues, such as the reasons for the pickup in house prices and the relationship with household spending and borrowing. It would also provide a better opportunity to explain the Committee s thinking. Overall, most members put more weight on the arguments, taken together, for not raising the repo rate this month.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. Eight members (the Governor, Rachel Lomax, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Marian Bell, Richard Lambert, Stephen Nickell and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. One member (Andrew Large) voted against, preferring to increase the repo rate by  basis points.