Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##Over the past month, equity prices had fallen sharply in the United States, the euro area and the United Kingdom, although not in Japan.  The FTSE All Share index was now more than % below its level at the Committee s previous meeting, and nearly % lower than the starting point used in the February Inflation Report. Nor were these declines confined to the technology and telecommunications sectors, either in this country or overseas. Although the Nasdaq index had fallen by more than a quarter over the past month, broader US indices such as the S&P  and the##NewPara##Wilshire  had also declined by %-%. More generally, the outperformance of the high-tech sectors since  had now been almost entirely reversed, both in the United States and the##NewPara##The size of these falls in equity prices could not plausibly reflect changes in risk-free real interest rates, but instead indicated lower expected profits and, perhaps, a higher equity risk premium associated with greater uncertainty about future returns. In the United States, options prices suggested that market participants now attached a higher probability than before to further sharp falls in equity prices. The declines already seen would tend to restrain the growth of private consumption (through the effects on personal sector wealth), of investment (through the effects on the cost of capital), and of exports, since this was a global phenomenon.##NewPara##Given the volatility of equity prices, the recent falls need not imply that there had been a major change in longer-term prospects for US productivity growth. They might instead represent a correction to earlier over-optimistic expectations of earnings growth for individual companies, or indeed an overshooting on the downside. In the United States, downside risks to equity prices remained: price to earnings ratios were still above historical averages. UK profit warnings, meanwhile, remained high compared with a year ago and were widely distributed across sectors,##NewPara##with an increasing number of firms citing the US slowdown as the reason for the revision downwards to their expected profits.##NewPara##Over the period since , the technology, media and telecommunications sector had accounted for all of the increase in UK manufacturing output. With the United Kingdom more dependent on this sector than many other countries, though much less so than the United States, there might be a correspondingly greater effect here from the global slowdown in these industries. The United Kingdom also had a leading position in the financial services industry, where growth might slow as a result of the downturn in financial markets.##NewPara##In the February Inflation Report, the Committee had considered the risks of a more pronounced slowdown in world activity than had been incorporated in the central projection. This slowdown was assumed to originate in the United States and to be associated with lower equity prices and a weaker dollar. Such an outcome would put downwards pressure on UK inflation.  But this was assumed to be offset in part by a depreciation of the sterling exchange rate index (ERI), with sterling rising by less than other currencies against the dollar.  Despite the equity market correction, however, so far the dollar had remained strong and in effective terms was at its highest level since . This strength was puzzling. It might suggest that market participants did not expect the slowdown in the United States to last for long, or alternatively that they had recently revised down their expectations about growth in the euro area. This, together with continuing optimism about medium-term US growth prospects (based on supply-side improvements) might explain the continuing flow into US equities from the euro area. These explanations were not fully consistent with movements in relative interest rates between the euro area and the United States. But the strength of the dollar need not be inconsistent with the falls seen in US equity markets, since the exchange rate was a relative price and equity prices had fallen sharply as well in many European countries. Dollar strength might also reflect  safe haven  flows, although to the extent that the slowdown was centred in the United States, this was not a particularly persuasive explanation.##NewPara##Against this background, although the sterling ERI had fallen back in recent days, it was still around % above the starting point used in the February Inflation Report. As such, it would tend to dampen upwards pressure on prices by a little more than in the February central projection.##NewPara##Meanwhile, UK money and credit aggregates continued to grow robustly, suggesting little slackening yet in consumption growth.   Household M had increased by .% in the year to  February , its fastest rate for three years, while growth in M lending to households over the  same period was just below %. Against a background of strengthening house prices and lower mortgage rates, growth in secured lending remained strong and the Bank s estimate of mortgage equity withdrawal in  Q had been revised up a little. Loan approvals remained robust, if a little lower than in January, while particulars delivered had begun to increase.##NewPara##Interest rates had also eased. If other lenders followed the reductions in Standard Variable Mortgage Rates (SVRs) announced the previous month, the effective mortgage rate would as a result eventually fall by more than the repo rate. Forward interest rates implied by short sterling futures contracts had also fallen, by between  and  basis points over the past month. The market had already priced in a reduction of  basis points in the repo rate for the Committee s April meeting, with market rates implying further reductions in the repo rate, to % or below by  Q.##NewPara##In summary, the falls in equity prices might over time be expected to restrain demand, and the strength of sterling would exert a dampening effect on inflation. By contrast, the money and credit data and the continuing strength in house prices would tend to underpin consumption, as would the fall in interest rates faced by mortgage borrowers.##NewTopic##The world economy##NewPara##In the United States, GDP growth in the first quarter seemed likely to be at or slightly above the rate assumed in the central projection in the February Inflation Report, and in that sense earlier fears about the downside risks had yet to materialise. But the sharp falls in US equity prices, and the continuing low levels of the major business and consumer confidence indices (which were in general only a little higher than a month ago) might signal a rather later, and perhaps more sluggish, recovery than that incorporated in the February central projection.##NewPara##US retail sales in January had been revised up sharply, although they had fallen back a little in February. Non-farm payrolls had increased again in February, although other labour market indicators suggested that unemployment might begin to rise soon, particularly if the US economy continued to grow significantly below trend. The recent special Senior Loan Officer Survey##NewPara##indicated tighter credit conditions, and also a fall in the demand for funds as a result of lower capital expenditure. This scaling back of investment plans might reflect a rise in the cost of equity capital, lower expectations of future demand (borne out by orders data), excess capacity in some sectors (with industrial sector capacity utilisation at its lowest since ) and lower profits, seen both in the data for  Q and in the spate of profit warnings since then. It might suggest a more prolonged slowdown than would be implied by a purely inventory-led cycle.##NewPara##There were downside risks stemming from the scale of the imbalances in the US economy, and   in particular the size of the private sector financial deficit. A sharp cutback by the corporate sector, designed to improve its financial position, could lead to higher unemployment and a retrenchment by the household sector. Separately, the fall in equity prices could in any case prompt a rise in household savings. These effects might be offset in part by more expansionary fiscal and monetary policy. Given the continued strength of the dollar, and slower growth in many other countries, the slowdown in the United States was less likely to result in a narrowing of the current account deficit than might otherwise have been expected. A sharp correction in these imbalances therefore##NewPara##remained a possibility, but it was as easy to paint a scenario in which the imbalances persisted for##NewPara##several years, with the necessary corrections taking place more gradually.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that the changes seen so far in business and consumer confidence and prospective corporate profitability were not obviously out of line with what might have been expected from an economy which had slowed suddenly from a growth rate of over % a year to little more than % in the fourth quarter of . While this slowdown was so far no greater than expected, it was possible that the period of slower growth might be more protracted than had earlier seemed likely.##NewPara##Within the euro area there were some signs of rather slower growth, particularly in Germany. Orders data for January had fallen sharply, and in February the IFO index had declined again, after January s rise. This weakness reflected decelerating domestic demand, in part due to slower growth in real disposable incomes. But it was important not to focus solely on Germany. Conditions elsewhere in the euro area were generally rather more robust, although business confidence was less buoyant even in France and euro-area industrial production had fallen in January; a slowdown in the telecommunications sector might also hold back growth. Nevertheless, both business and industrial confidence remained well above their long-run averages, and while forward-looking indicators##NewPara##suggested some slowing to come, forecasts of growth for the euro area as a whole had so far been lowered only modestly.##NewPara##While quarter-on-quarter movements in Japanese GDP remained erratic, there was little sign yet of any upturn in the economy; if anything, expectations of growth had fallen since February, and the Tankan survey had shown a sharp fall in business confidence. Elsewhere in Asia, growth in industrial production was slowing rapidly, in part because of the downturn in US and Japanese demand for electronic goods from the region.##NewPara##Taken as a whole, the prospects for the world economy appeared rather weaker than at the time of the February Inflation Report. In March, outside forecasters had lowered their projections for growth in the United States, Japan and Germany to below the central projection in the February Report, and they seemed likely to revise these forecasts down further in April. That said, UK export markets, which were principally in Europe, were less affected by the global slowdown than export markets worldwide.##NewTopic##Demand and output in the United Kingdom##NewPara##Quarterly real GDP growth in  Q had been revised up from .% to .%, with final domestic demand now estimated to have increased by .%, as against .% previously. Gross fixed capital formation was now estimated to have increased by .% in the quarter; within this total business investment had grown by .%. These revisions resolved an earlier puzzle, as previous weak data had appeared inconsistent with the state of company finances and surveys of investment intentions.##NewPara##Until recently, there had been little sign that the slowdown in the United States was having a significant impact on the United Kingdom. Survey data taken as a whole suggested that total export growth was unlikely to slow much in the first half of . This might simply reflect lags: it would take time to see the effects of a US-related slowdown here. Evidence of these effects might now be beginning to emerge. Two-thirds of the firms questioned in a survey by the Ba nk s Agents had revised down their expectations for exports to the United States (although these downwards revisions were partially offset by stronger expected growth in exports to other markets).  That survey suggested that expectations of output growth, and to a lesser extent investment intentions, had also##NewPara##been revised down. Large firms with US parents and those in the information and communications technology sector were the most significantly affected. These results were in line with the latest figures for manufacturing export orders in the survey by the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS).##NewPara##The slowdown in the world economy would place pressure on the externally traded sectors of the economy, including manufacturing, particularly given the continuing resilience of the sterling exchange rate. For some members, this sharpened the policy dilemma. At some point, private sector domestic demand growth would need to slow to below trend. The longer this adjustment was delayed, the greater it might need to be. It could also involve a sharp fall in the sterling exchange rate.##NewPara##In January, manufacturing output had fallen sharply, reflecting a fall in the output of the electrical and optical equipment sector, while in February it had risen by only .%. And the CIPS manufacturing survey showed both output and orders falling sharply, to below  in both cases. These figures might in themselves point to somewhat weaker GDP growth than had earlier been expected. On the other hand, the business activity index for services, while also falling a little, remained well above the neutral  level, as did the equivalent series for construction.##NewPara##Expenditure-based data suggested a somewhat stronger picture. In recent years, the initial output-based estimate of GDP has been subject to revision, generally in an upwards direction. In contrast to the prospective weakening of external demand, final domestic demand continued to grow strongly, and would be supported going forward by the public spending plans set out in the Budget. The new figures for business investment growth in Q were even stronger than the estimates made the previous month, and were consistent with continuing growth interrupted by a pause around the start of . The implications of this strength for future capital spending were less clear.##NewPara##In the February Inflation Report, consumption growth had been expected to moderate. In part this reflected an expected easing in the labour market (and so in real income growth) which had yet     to happen.  While consumption had grown by less than expected in  Q, at .%, this might have been a result of weather and transport-related disruption. Retail sales volumes had increased by .% on the latest three-month comparison, which of itself might suggest something of a rebound in consumption in Q. While the GfK consumer confidence measure had risen slightly, the more recent##NewPara##(and more volatile) MORI index had fallen sharply, perhaps reflecting the uncertainties caused by foot and mouth disease and the state of equity markets at the time of the survey.##NewPara##For some, continuing strong growth in consumption remained an upside risk to the forecast, supported by the buoyancy of the money and credit figures and the pick-up in the housing market (both in terms of the quantities and prices data). The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors had noted a continuing increase in the balance of estate agents reporting rises in house prices, and provisional data indicated a further rise in March, although the forward-looking data suggested that the pace of increase in house prices might soon begin to moderate. The CBI Distributive Trades survey reported robust retail sales growth in March, coupled with significant increases for both wholesaling and the motor trades, although when sales were adjusted for the time of year, this    strength was less apparent, and was not expected to persist into April. Meanwhile, total household wealth was estimated to have fallen by  % in  Q (an estimate which included the effects both of higher house prices and lower equity prices). This reduced the upside risk to consumption and by itself might eventually reduce the level of consumption by  %-% over the medium term.##NewPara##There were, as always, uncertainties about the outlook. In particular, there were downside risks from the slowdown in the global economy and the associated weakness of equity markets, both here and overseas, and also from foot and mouth disease. The last of these was difficult to quantify. Not only was it hard to predict the number of new cases which would emerge in the coming weeks and months, but there were also indirect effects (especially on tourism) and economy-wide effects (on business and consumer confidence) which were highly uncertain but could be significant.##NewPara##The short-run effects on the agricultural sector were severe. Agriculture itself accounted for less than % of GDP, with the livestock sector closer to  % of GDP. The effect would be to reduce both demand and supply in the agricultural sector. As a result, the direct impact on inflation from lower agricultural output was likely to be small.##NewPara##The indirect effects, both on businesses further up the supply chain and on tourism and confidence more widely, would tend to reduce demand relative to supply. However, the size of these effects was hard to gauge, and would depend on the extent of any substitution effects. For instance, would those from the United Kingdom who decided not to visit the countryside nevertheless spend##NewPara##as much as originally planned on other UK goods and services? If so, this would have no##NewPara##implications for aggregate UK consumption. However, such a shift in the geographical pattern of expenditure might exacerbate existing regional imbalances, which could conceivably have implications for the outlook for inflation, and hence for policy. There might also be changes in the timing of expenditure. By contrast, if overseas visitors chose not to visit the United Kingdom, or if UK residents holidayed overseas, the effect on demand would be unambiguous: UK GDP would be lower than otherwise, with a more negative contribution to growth from net trade and hence weaker inflationary pressures.##NewPara##Whatever the impact of the foot and mouth outbreak in the short term, most members of the Committee thought that unless the tourism and confidence effects proved greater and more persistent than at present seemed likely, the impact into next year would be relatively moderate.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Quantities data in the labour market were once again relatively buoyant. Employment was growing faster than the population of working age, after several months in which the Labour Force Survey (LFS) data had shown a weaker picture, perhaps as a result of travel and weather-related disruptions in autumn . Unemployment continued to fall, both on the LFS and claimant-count measures; the LFS measure had declined to .% in the three months to January, while the##NewPara##claimant-count measure showed unemployment below one million in February  for the first time in over  years. When taken together with the CIPS surveys, and a small fall in the inactivity rate, there was little sign of any easing yet in the labour market.##NewPara##Forward-looking indicators, however, were rather more mixed. The Report on Jobs from the Recruitment and Employment Confederation (REC) pointed to continued increases in permanent placements in March, but at the slowest rate for two years. The index of national press recruitment advertising was down on a year ago. Nevertheless the REC survey concluded that the labour market remained tight by historical standards, with widespread staff shortages. The Bank s regional Agents reported that while the labour market remained tight in most parts of the country, there were early signs of an easing in a few sectors.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that despite the tightness in the labour market, there was little indication so far of any worrying increase in settlements and earnings growth. Month-by-month figures for##NewPara##average earnings remained erratic, especially when compared with the figures a year ago which had been distorted by millennium-related payments. But the drift up in regular pay increases (particularly in the private sector which had moved from .% in July to .% in December), now seemed to have stopped. The figure for December had now been revised down to .% and that for January was .% (although this was distorted by the comparison with a year ago). There were therefore some signs that the rate of unemployment which was consistent with stable earnings##NewPara##growth was lower than previously believed. Nevertheless, the Committee would continue to monitor pay growth carefully, particularly given that April was a heavy month for settlements.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##There would be several erratic influences on RPIX inflation in the coming months, associated with the timing and nature of the Budget measures, movements in utilities prices last year, and the impact of foot and mouth disease. While it was possible that these might net out month by month, this could not be assured, and the data would therefore need to be interpreted accordingly.##NewPara##Some members noted that if the components of RPIX were weighted together on the basis of their past persistence (with the aim of adjusting for erratic movements) rather than their importance in household budgets, the resulting measure of  core  inflation was around .%, and was projected to remain there for the next year. Others observed that the standard errors around such forecasts were large, and had reservations about using this technique, particularly to project inflation more than a few months ahead.##NewPara##The Bank s regional Agents reported that prices continued to be restrained by competition and consumer pressure, although a few more companies had managed to increase prices modestly over the past month. But the CIPS surveys suggested diminished price pressures, with input costs in manufacturing rising at their slowest rate for  months and in services for  months. Output prices showed a similar picture. In services these prices had risen at their slowest rate for  months, while in manufacturing, prices had fallen for the first time since the series began in November . Meanwhile manufacturing output prices excluding excise duties had risen by only .% in the year to February.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##All members agreed that the prospects for the world economy now appeared rather weaker than at the Committee s previous meeting, and that the associated fall in equity prices would also restrain demand. Taken together with the short-run effects on demand and supply from foot and mouth disease, the downside risks to UK growth this year had increased. At the same time, price and cost pressures continued to be subdued, both in product and labour markets. The differences in view were mainly about the scale of the downside risks. Against this background, it was agreed that a reduction in the Bank s repo rate was needed this month to meet the inflation target; the question was how large that reduction should be.##NewPara##For most members, the repo rate should be reduced this month by  basis points. While recognising the downside risks from the international slowdown, the fall in equity prices and foot and mouth disease, and while agreeing that it was important to remain forward looking, it was   equally important not to over-react. Final domestic demand growth remained robust.  The strength of the housing market would cushion the effects on consumption of falls in equity prices. Nor were there signs of weakness in business investment and government consumption; indeed, the reverse. The buoyancy of the money and credit aggregates, together with a labour market which was if anything continuing to tighten, suggested an upside risk to demand and inflation. Against this background, a greater-than-expected cut in interest rates at a time of fragile confidence could even prove to be counterproductive, by implying that the prospect for the UK economy was seen to be worse than it was. Lowering interest rates too far also risked exacerbating the imbalances between a strong domestic sector and weak net trade, imbalances which at some point would need to be resolved. The balance of risks, when taken together with the still moderate increase in earnings growth and subdued retail price inflation, suggested that a  basis point reduction in the repo rate was appropriate this month. All of these members agreed that the downside risks would need to be monitored carefully, and some of them felt that it might not require much additional downside news to justify a further cut in rates.##NewPara##On a second view, although the decision was very finely balanced, it was better to reduce the repo rate by  basis points this month. While agreeing with the factors cited for a reduction in the repo rate, the continuing weakness of inflationary pressures against a background of significant downside risks, particularly the risk of a deterioration in confidence, argued for going further than##NewPara## basis points. With price pressures remaining restrained month after month, it seemed less probable that inflation would pick up to the target of  % during the next two years without further action on interest rates. Sterling had not fallen back and this, together with competitive pressures, price resistance from consumers and the benefits from the application of information and communications technology, was continuing to help restrain inflation. Most measures of domestically generated inflation were now below  %. It was of course possible that a##NewPara## basis point cut in rates might damage confidence, but it was just as likely that a pre-emptive reduction would help to sustain it. For these reasons, and as an insurance against the downside risks, the repo rate should be reduced to .% this month.##NewPara##On a third view, the decision to reduce the repo rate by  basis points this month was more clear-cut. In March, members taking this view had voted for a reduction in the repo rate of##NewPara## basis points. More was now required; a  basis point reduction was not large either in the UK context or by comparison with movements elsewhere and, if properly explained, might help bolster confidence rather than dent it. These members had already been more pessimistic about the global economy than the central projection in the February Inflation Report and the recent news, together with developments in financial markets, had reinforced these concerns. Foot and mouth disease would impact on tourism from overseas (already suffering from the US slowdown and the strong exchange rate); in addition, the impact on confidence among those in rural areas might be neither small nor brief. Despite the strength in some backward-looking series, many forward-looking indicators were beginning to turn down. At the same time, on some measures policy remained contractionary, with real interest rates still slightly above their  neutral  level and the lagged effects of past exchange rate and interest rate movements tightening conditions a little further this year. A  persistence-weighted  measure of RPIX inflation was running at around  % and was likely to continue to do so for the rest of the year. Input and output price pressures seemed to be weakening still further, and RPIX inflation continued its slow and steady decline, to further below the target. Without further cuts in interest rates the recovery in inflation to  %, as set out in the February Inflation Report, seemed increasingly unlikely, depending as it did on estimates of capacity utilisation indicating that current output was above full capacity. This was not consistent with survey data or with different conceptual approaches to the measurement of capital inputs. Imbalances in the economy, such as those between domestic demand and net exports, might eventually cause problems but these, given the Committee s remit, were secondary to the need to meet the inflation target. A##NewPara## basis point reduction in interest rates was therefore needed this month to help sustain domestic##NewPara##demand and improve the prospects of returning inflation to target. It was possible that further reductions would be needed in future months, even in the absence of further downside news.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be reduced by  basis points to .%. Six members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, David Clementi, Christopher Allsopp, Charles Bean and Stephen Nickell) voted for the proposition. DeAnne Julius, Ian Plenderleith and Sushil Wadhwani voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.