Demand and output##NewPara##Final domestic demand in Q had turned out as expected at the time of the November Inflation Report. However, consumption had been a little stronger than expected, while investment was a little weaker. On the basis of the pattern of revisions over recent years, it was quite possible that the Q investment figures could be revised up. However, it was also possible that the weaker figures partly reflected a  millennium pause  in IT-related investment spending. The slightly##NewPara##stronger-than-expected consumption numbers reflected the ONS  attempts to capture the changing seasonal pattern of car registrations. The figures for consumption growth in the first half of the year could therefore be revised down, reflecting the latest estimates of the seasonal factors, when the National Accounts for Q were published. Abstracting from these seasonal effects, the underlying picture for consumption growth in Q appeared broadly in line with expectations at the time of the November Inflation Report. Looking beyond Q, the latest evidence suggested that car registrations were turning out quite weak   possibly reflecting expectations of reductions in car prices in the near future, in which case car sales, and hence consumption, might subsequently pick up at some point.##NewPara##The Committee discussed other recent indicators of household consumption. Retail sales growth had remained strong at the beginning of the fourth quarter, though the three-month on three-month growth rate for October was slightly lower than it had been a few months ago. The Bank s regional Agents  contacts were reporting some strengthening of retail activity, but the picture seemed somewhat weaker than the official data. There were several possible explanations. First, sales values were rising less quickly than volumes, since the retail sales deflator was falling, and this might be affecting contacts  responses. Second, retail floor space was probably still rising   and this was reflected in the difference between total sales and like-for-like sales in the British Retail Consortium survey. Third, it was possible that the Agents  retail contacts were weighted more towards those sectors that were losing market share, such as department stores, and less towards discount stores.##NewPara##Consumer confidence, as measured by the GfK survey, had fallen in November but remained above its long-run average. The MORI survey had risen, but this series was usually more volatile than the GfK measure. While the recent fall in the GfK survey might reflect monthly volatility, the rises in interest rates since the beginning of September might have had some dampening effect on confidence. The disaggregated responses to the individual questions in the survey showed that respondents thought that the general level of unemployment would rise. This seemed at odds with the recent evidence that employment had continued to grow. It was possible that, although employment remained high, the pace of job creation and job destruction was higher now than in the past and that this had heightened individuals  feelings about their job insecurity in an existing job. If so, that uncertainty could in turn have a dampening effect on consumption growth. But looking beyond the latest movements in consumer confidence and retail sales, the fundamental determinants of consumption such as housing and financial wealth and real incomes seemed to be strengthening.##NewPara##Turning to net trade, both exports and imports had turned out a little stronger than expected at the time of the November Inflation Report. The UK share of world export markets probably increased in Q, but was much lower than it had been prior to the appreciation of sterling from August . The export orders index in the latest CIPS survey had remained above  for the seventh successive month, while the CBI monthly trends survey balance for export orders was negative, but less so than a year ago. There were, however, some signs that export optimism had deteriorated in recent months, for example in the DHL survey.##NewPara##There had also been slightly stronger-than-expected import growth in Q, so that the contribution of net trade to GDP growth in Q was only slightly more positive than had been expected. Strong growth in imports could be linked to re-exporting, and it seemed stronger than was consistent with recently observed domestic demand growth.##NewPara##Looking forward, the central projection for activity in the published fan chart assumed that net trade would make negative contributions to GDP growth in the forecast period. The net trade contributions in the central projection were somewhat more negative than projected by the average of other forecasters, and that largely reflected a steeper assumed sterling depreciation by other forecasters. The sterling effective exchange rate had strengthened since the November Report and other things being equal that would tend to depress net exports relative to the projection made then.##NewPara##The latest data for non-EU trade in October showed a marked fall in exports but September had been strong. That evidence seemed broadly consistent with the projections so far. The Agents  special survey tried to shed light on the recent export puzzle. The picture that emerged was of very considerable price and market pressures. This was particularly marked for exports to the EU, which##NewPara##was to be expected given the movements in sterling against the euro compared with the dollar. Overall, the export picture in the survey seemed weaker than that suggested by recent official data.##NewPara##On output, the latest estimate of GDP growth in Q was still in line with the .% first estimate available at the time of the November Report. The latest manufacturing data showed a slight upward revision to Q, although growth in October had been lower than the average monthly rate in Q. The CBI Industrial Trends survey for November recorded a positive balance for output expectations, though less positive than in October. The latest construction survey indicators also seemed quite buoyant, more so than the official data on new orders. The monthly CIPS services survey had shown a marked increase in the activity index. This index looked particularly strong when compared with the average since the survey began in , which itself reflected a period of strong service sector output growth. The latest CBI/Deloitte & Touche survey however pointed to some recent weakening of consumer services volumes. There were some suggestions that the latest rise in the C IPS survey might be millennium-related rather than a more sustained acceleration in service sector activity. There was however little evidence from the Bank s regional Agents of strong millennium-related effects on demand or output, apart from the possible pause in IT investment noted above and some isolated examples of increasing inventories. The latest National Institute of Economic and Social Research projection of GDP growth in the three months to November was .%, down slightly on##NewPara##the outturn for October. The staff s latest survey -based estimate of GDP growth in Q was broadly at the same rate as in the third quarter, but higher than in November s central projection.##NewPara##Overall there was not much evidence, on balance, that demand and output were turning out differently from what had been expected in November. If anything, the risks were of slightly stronger outturns in Q than thought a month ago.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##Broad money growth, excluding Other Financial Corporations, remained fairly stable. The most striking monetary indicator over the past month had been the marked increase in narrow money in November. Notes and coin were growing at the fastest annual rate since , with a particularly rapid rise in November. The seasonal adjustment updated the seasonal factors each month using a three-year window. This meant that one third of the rapid increase in November had already been attributed as a seasonal effect   the headline increase was even larger than the seasonally adjusted figures suggested. The staff had tried to make allowance for the possible effects of the millennium and the Government s Winter Allowance, but it seemed likely to explain only part of the total increase in November, though there was great uncertainty over the magnitude of these effects. An increase in money balances ahead of the year-end might occur for several reasons. For example, it might be precautionary on account of concerns about computer-related YK problems, or it might be##NewPara##to spend on millennium-related celebrations. Even in the latter case, the effects might only be temporary if spending was transferred from other months. It might have no effect on aggregate spending if it reflected a shift from other types of spending to more cash-based items. In any event, it seemed unclear why households should withdraw substantial balances in November, so far from the year-end. There was no anecdotal evidence to support a large effect. Although there was a link between retail sales and narrow money, it had not been particularly close from month to month recently. There was, however, a risk that higher money balances would eventually feed through to consumption, even if the balances were not spent immediately. There was a range of views on how much weight to attach to the risk of higher spending. For some, the risk was mitigated by the fact that the large monthly increase came just before the year end, when interpretation of##NewPara##month-on-month changes was usually difficult and was made more so by any potential millennium-related effects.##NewPara##Asset prices had risen in the UK and overseas. The FTSE  had risen by % over the past month and the FTSE All-Share index was now more than % up, and over % above the fifteen day average used as the starting assumption in the November Inflation Report projections. There had been rises in Japan, continental Europe and the United States too. The FT Small-Capitalisation index had outperformed the FTSE  index over the past month. Some of the rise in share price indices was accounted for by high-tech IT stocks, but this did not account for the entire rise. Nor was it clear that the rise in IT stocks should be excluded in any event, because it was necessary to look at the aggregate. However, fluctuations in these stocks might be contributing to greater volatility. The rise in indices both here and abroad seemed broadly consistent with a general rise in market confidence about the strength of world activity.##NewPara##For the UK the rise in equity wealth, coupled with the strength of borrowing for consumption, suggested a robust outlook for consumption growth. House prices had again been volatile, with the Nationwide index recording a strong rise on the month, while the Halifax index had fallen. Annual percentage rates of increase in house prices, and hence gross housing wealth, were in double digits, and many short-run growth rates were at least as fast as the annual rates. Activity indicators in the housing market had been mixed over the month, but on balance showed activity broadly stable over the past few months and stronger than at the beginning of the year. The staff s provisional estimate of the increase in mortgage equity withdrawal in the third quarter, though well below the levels of the late s as a share of personal income, was quite marked, and appeared to be closely correlated with recent growth rates in household consumption spending.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##The Bank s commodity price index had fallen in October, reflecting both the fall in oil prices and a fall in metals and food prices. However oil prices had risen again in November. Producer input prices continued to reflect higher oil prices. At the retail level, oil prices had been reflected in higher inflation in continental Europe. But despite higher petrol prices in the UK too   contributing around##NewPara##. percentage points to annual inflation in the year to October   inflation as measured by the harmonised consumer price index in the UK was now below the European average. This was not too surprising given the past strengthening of sterling.##NewPara##Retail price inflation on the targeted RPIX measure had risen to .% in October. This was in line with expectations at the time of the Committee s November meeting. The latest CBI Distributive Trades survey balance for retail prices had turned negative in November, and was well below its historical average, which might point to further weakness in retail prices. However, the historical average reflected periods of much higher inflation, so it was difficult to interpret the recent data. Anecdotal evidence suggested wider discounting than in the past, even of some luxury brands. It was difficult to tell if the lower-than-expected outturns for some of the components of the retail prices index provided evidence of a larger-than-expected squeeze on retail margins than had been assumed in the fan chart published in the November Inflation Report. It might simply reflect a different timing for the reduction in margins than had been assumed. Alternatively, it could be due to other cost factors that had yet to be observed in the data or simply month-to-month volatility with no implications for the short-term profile of inflation.##NewPara##The weakness of goods prices was clearly reflected in the retail sales deflator, which was based on the same data. The CBI/Deloitte & Touche survey balance for prices of consumer services had also fallen recently, but this survey had only been running for a few quarters. However, the CIPS services prices index had risen on the month.##NewPara##The continuing pressure on retail margins did not seem to reflect weak demand, but other factors such as increased competition. If so, increased competition and reduction in retail margins might spread along the supply chain. Even given the recent rise in input prices, it might be difficult for manufacturers to pass on higher costs, at least in the short term.  It was possible that aggregate supply had become more elastic for reasons other than a structural increase in competition in the UK, such as increased investment elsewhere by international companies and a corresponding increase in world supply. More efficient and cheaper access to information about domestic and overseas production and prices, and associated scope for cost savings on inputs, might also have an effect on UK prices. For example, the more widespread use of the Internet might affect UK productivity growth and pricing behaviour. There was little evidence that this was, as yet, having a big effect,##NewPara##though its use could grow rapidly. In the first instance one might see greater effects on inter-firm trade than at the retail level. One much quoted example of internet activity was in books, but recent movements in prices looked small when compared with the impact of the ending of the Net Book Agreement some time ago. It was therefore important not automatically to assume that the effects of the Internet would be bigger than previous shocks.##NewPara##Most of the evidence of weaker prices related to goods prices; indeed the gap between service and goods price inflation was as large as at any time since . That gap was much larger than could be explained by differences in trend productivity growth between the sectors.##NewPara##Within the RPI there were large rises in a few components of the services index   notably insurance and foreign holidays. Some members thought it was useful to gauge the underlying behaviour of RPIX by looking at sub-indices which excluded volatile items, such as fuel prices, or possibly other  exogenous  items such as seasonal foods and taxes. Other members thought that similar arguments could be applied to changes in prices resulting from exchange rate movements; and that other than in the very near-term, when nominal rigidities existed, it was not useful to exclude items from the index.##NewPara##There had been some recent announcements on water, electricity and gas pricing. Taken together the effect on the short-term profile for retail prices was broadly in line with what had been assumed in the November Inflation Report projections.##NewTopic##The world economy##NewPara##The likely pace of growth in the United States remained subject to various uncertainties. The latest stock market rise added weight to the factors underpinning strong consumption growth, but had also added to the risks of a sharper slowdown if equity prices were to fall. Inflation had risen somewhat over recent months, although not on the core measure. In any event, the US situation appeared to be rather different from the conjuncture of events in the UK, because of the much stronger recent productivity growth there.##NewPara##The Japanese GDP data had been heavily revised on release of the Q estimate. GDP was recorded to have fallen by % in the third quarter, but this followed an upward revision to the second quarter. Overall the new data and revisions back to  left the level of GDP broadly in line with what had been expected at the time of the November Inflation Report. The markets had seemingly taken the view that as much weight should be placed on the upward revisions to the earlier data, as on the weaker Q growth number (which was subject to future revision). But if one placed more##NewPara##weight on the momentum implied by the recent numbers, then that would imply a less sanguine view of prospects for the Japanese economy.##NewPara##The news on activity in the rest of the industrial world, including the euro area, was either in line with or slightly more positive than expected over the past month. There seemed little news in emerging markets over the past month that would materially affect the prospects for UK inflation.##NewPara##Turning to the pattern of exchange rates, the recent German data had contributed to a slight rise in the euro over the days leading up to the Committee s meeting, though over the past month as a whole the euro had weakened further against the dollar. Sterling s effective exchange rate had not changed much since the time of the November meeting, but was around % above the fifteen-day average used as a starting point for the projections. That strength was primarily against the euro, rather than against other currencies, reflecting more buoyant views of prospects for activity in the US and UK. Relative movements in yield curves over the period could account for some of sterling s appreciation against the euro.  Markets had now had a chance to adjust to the interest rate increases in the United States, the euro area and the United Kingdom over the past few months. There had been no immediate major effects on financial markets. Compared with some people s prior expectations, market activity still seemed to be quite well sustained as the end of the year approached.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##The latest labour market data had by and large been as expected. There was, however, some concern among some of the Bank s regional Agents  contacts about prospects for the coming pay round. The Agents were also finding more widespread evidence of skill shortages, which had been building since the spring. But neither this nor any of the other survey evidence on skill shortages had yet fed through to the observed earnings data. It was possible that the sentiment being picked up by the Agents was rather more about a general desire for more highly trained and educated workers rather than a cyclical point about tightness in the labour market.##NewPara##Some data presented by Bank staff on employment transition probabilities - flows out of various categories of inactivity - had highlighted a large number of people flowing from the category of  not wanting a job  into employment within a short period of time. At first sight this was rather surprising, but might be explained by people seeing new job opportunities become available which they had not previously expected. More research was needed in this area, but so far it suggested that the pool of people who could move into employment was greater than might be thought based on more traditional and more narrowly focused measures of potential labour supply. It might help to explain why labour tightness had not fed through to earnings as fully as might have been expected.##NewPara##No new official whole economy productivity or unit labour cost data were yet available for Q, but manufacturing productivity had shown signs of picking up and had consequently begun to reduce the rate of increase of unit labour costs in that sector. The latest GDP data suggested that productivity growth for the whole economy might have risen to around % at an annualised rate in the third quarter, which would be close to its long run average. This was important, as the central projection in the November Report had assumed a recovery in whole economy productivity growth over the forecast period.  The fall in profit margins could not go on forever, and required a continuing intensification of competitive pressures. Unless there was an even stronger recovery in productivity growth than had been assumed, earnings growth would need to turn out as low as assumed for the central projection of inflation to hold. Even then, unless productivity growth improved further, inflation would tend to rise at some point in the future, as the short-run downward price effects - of lower margins and a strengthening exchange rate - wore off and the effect of the underlying strength of demand began to dominate.##NewPara##Members of the Committee reflected on the November central projection for real earnings growth. The earnings profile in the central projection was somewhat lower than the average of outside forecasts made for , and given the evidence of skill shortages it was possible that the risks to this projection were more clearly on the upside. But some members retained doubts about the interpretation of the data, and as yet there was no firm evidence that the outturn for earnings growth was diverging markedly from the central projection made in November. This question would need to be re-examined in the context of the February forecast round.##NewTopic##Tactical considerations##NewPara##There were several tactical considerations discussed this month. First, the Committee concluded that there was no reason to change the view outlined in the minutes of the September meeting that the YK period should not constrain UK monetary policy setting. However, there was a related consideration concerning the data. The uncertainties about the size of millennium-related effects might make it more than usually difficult to interpret the data relating to the period covering the year-end; particular examples were for consumer spending, investment, money and earnings. In##NewPara##each case there would be difficulty in reaching a clear interpretation of the data immediately after the turn of the year. But it was always difficult to interpret the data for, say, retail sales around Christmas and the New Year. It was not clear that this fog would be that much thicker than usual, and it would not preclude making a change in interest rates in either December or January.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Some members thought that the balance of arguments was in favour of a rise in interest rates of  basis points this month, but attached different weights to the various supporting factors. F irst, for those members who had contemplated voting for a  basis point increase in interest rates in November (rather than ), there did not need to be much news on the month to justify a further##NewPara## basis point rise in rates now. Second, and related to this, the latest data did on balance suggest the central projection for inflation would be a little higher than thought a month ago. The latest evidence on activity was at least as strong as expected a month ago, and suggested that the pace of output growth might not slow as envisaged in the central case. In particular, world demand now seemed to be strengthening, and some of the influences on UK consumption growth - wealth, real incomes and borrowing - seemed to have remained strong or to have strengthened over the past month. On prices, there had been signs of a compression of retail margins, and sterling had strengthened which would put further downward pressure on the price level. But the oil price had risen further. Third, the position of the UK economy looked very different from when the last reduction in interest rates had been made in June. It was unclear whether the  basis point rise in rates since the summer would be sufficient to slow the economy to a more sustainable pace, and a rise in rates now might helpfully affect expectations. Fourth, the projection for inflation made in November had an upward slope at the two-year horizon. The passage of each month meant that other things being equal the projection for inflation would be higher two years ahead. So even if there were no news on the month there could be a case for a rise in interest rates. Fifth, in the view of some members, the risks of making a big monetary policy mistake were greater on the upside, and stemmed from the potential for the tightening labour market to begin to feed through rapidly to wages and prices, which suggested raising rates sooner rather than later. Overall, the case for raising rates this month, rather than delaying, was not a matter of urgency, but on balance the evidence pointed to the need for a further rise in the repo rate of  basis points.##NewPara##A second view was that there was no need for a change in interest rates this month. On this view, the news on demand and output was broadly as expected at the time of the Inflation Report, albeit with the risks perhaps now slightly more on the upside. The news on labour market quantities was also slightly tighter than expected. However, the likely short-term profile for inflation was if anything a little lower than thought a month ago. Indeed, the downward effects on prices from reductions in utilities prices, removal of fuel and tobacco escalators and increasing competition could well be larger than had been built into the published central projection in November. Overall, neither the news on demand nor that on prices this month was conclusive. The data continued to highlight the same short-run trade-off puzzle between output and prices discussed last month in the Report and the minutes of the Committee s previous meeting. Looking forward, the prospects were still for rising inflation at the two-year horizon, so a further tightening would probably be needed at some##NewPara##stage if the economy continued along the path outlined in the published November central projection. In particular, given the latest news on labour market quantities and skill shortages, it was possible that the central projection for earnings growth in  made at the time of the November Inflation Report was now too low. But there would be more hard evidence on earnings fairly soon as many settlements were agreed early in the New Year, and the risk of waiting another month or two would be unlikely to give rise to a big policy mistake given the saucer-shaped projection for inflation.##NewPara##There was time to wait and see if signs of earnings and price pressures emerged. There was therefore no need to change interest rates this month.##NewPara##A third view also led to a conclusion that no change in interest rates was needed this month. On this view, the latest indicators were consistent with a slowdown in the rate of growth of domestic demand and output through the fourth quarter of  and beyond, and the short-term profile for inflation was at least as weak as in the central projection in the Inflation Report. The exchange rate had appreciated compared with the central assumption, and was closest to the constant exchange rate profile described in the November Inflation Report (see pages  and ). A higher exchange rate would put more downward pressure on prices than implied by the November central projection. On this view it was prudent to wait and gauge the impact of the two previous increases in interest rates since the summer, and to see whether there would be a further intensification of competitive pressures. A rise in interest rates now would risk pushing inflation further below the target.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be maintained at .%. Six members of the Committee (the Governor, David Clementi, Charles Goodhart,##NewPara##DeAnne Julius, Ian Plenderleith and Sushil Wadhwani) voted for the proposition. Mervyn King, Willem Buiter and John Vickers voted against, preferring a rise in rates of  basis points.