Demand and output##NewPara##The Committee reviewed recent developments in demand and output. The appreciation of the exchange rate had had much less effect on the reported data on external trade in goods up to August (non-EU) and July (EU), and in services (up to Q) than had been expected. Business surveys and reports from the Bank s Agencies had suggested that there would be a large effect (and most were continuing to do so), but some surveys, eg the September CIPS survey, were now suggesting that the export outlook had become less gloomy. Meanwhile, the indications available to date were that output growth in Q had been considerably stronger than the central projection in the August Inflation Report.##NewPara##There was relatively little news on domestic demand.  Consumer spending had been growing fairly fast. It was not accelerating, but the CBI distributive trades survey - which might have been depressed as a consequence of public reaction to the death of Diana, Princess of Wales - had shown greater optimism among retailers. Though the GFK index of consumer confidence had been rising steadily, the MORI index had fallen back sharply, partly reversing a large rise that had probably been the result of demutualisation windfalls. In the housing market, the divergence between the Nationwide and Halifax price indices had widened further, but the other indicators of housing demand did not suggest rapidly growing demand, and therefore seemed more easily reconciled with the Halifax view of more moderate growth. There was no evidence that domestic demand had been##NewPara##substantially stronger than expected in Q, so it seemed likely that the unexpected strength of output reflected net exports.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the significance of stronger than expected output, and four points were made. First, the manufacturing output figures combined with the newly released Workforce In Employment survey implied, if taken at face value, that manufacturing productivity had been static in the last two years, during which the economy had been in a cyclical upswing.  Some members thought that the manufacturing output figures would be revised upwards. To the extent that higher output reflected higher productivity and higher capacity output this would not necessarily imply that there was more pressure on productive capacity than currently thought.##NewPara##Second, the depreciation of the exchange rate since its peak in late July would have relieved part of the pressure on exporters  margins. Moreover, it might have encouraged exporters to believe that the earlier appreciation was partly transitory, and thus to persist in selling at unattractive margins to maintain their presence in overseas markets. The Committee considered whether recent reports that the United Kingdom was more likely to join EMU would have encouraged exporters further, by reducing uncertainty about future exchange rates.##NewPara##Third, it was possible that the effects of sterling appreciation on net exports had simply been delayed. It was notoriously difficult to predict the timing of peaks in economic growth rates, and the peak might come a little later than had been projected in the August Inflation Report. There were signs in business surveys that growth might now be slowing and important questions for policy were whether the labour market was at the point at which earnings would begin to accelerate and whether the policy tightening that had taken place already would be enough to bring GDP growth back towards trend. If the peak in growth were to be later than in the Inflation Report projection, but the profile of growth after the peak were to be the same as in the projection, the level of output after the peak would be higher than in the projection by a constant amount. Inflation would be higher than in the projection, unless potential output was also higher than assumed.##NewPara##Fourth, it was possible that there had been a supply-side improvement in the non-price competitiveness of internationally tradeable goods and services produced in the United Kingdom, or that the relevant price elasticities were smaller than had been thought, so that the long-run effect of the appreciation on net exports would be smaller than had been projected.##NewPara##Taken as a whole, the evidence suggested that net exports could remain stronger than had been projected in August, and the net effect of this on total demand and hence on domestic costs would need to be carefully watched.##NewTopic##Labour market##NewPara##The tightening of the labour market had continued, and the fall in claimant unemployment of , in August had been higher than the staff estimate of the trend fall of ,-, a month. According to the most recent Labour Force Survey, short-term unemployment was at its lowest since the early s. The inactivity rate, however, was not unusually low: the counterpart of rising employment during this recovery had been falling unemployment rather than a falling inactivity rate, and total employment was still well below its late-s levels. The higher inactivity rate, and its persistence, might be a one-off consequence of the expansion of tertiary education. Indications of skill shortages were becoming more widespread. More information on the extent of labour market tightening would be provided in the quarterly Labour Force Survey, which would be available before the Committee s next meeting.##NewPara##Notwithstanding the tightening of the labour market, earnings growth had remained lower than projected in the August Inflation Report. The staff analysis had showed that the reported increase in underlying average earnings growth in July had been the result of bonus payments. Spreading these payments over the full year put underlying average earnings growth in the range    -   %; these calculations did not show any acceleration in earnings during the last few months.##NewPara##Members discussed the recent three-year pay settlement in the construction industry. It appeared that the first-year award included the consolidation of a number of special payments and in aggregate terms was equivalent to around  /%. But the larger increases in later years appeared to reflect both shortages of skilled labour and an expectation of rising inflation.##NewPara##Members discussed the current combination of rapid tightening and surprisingly low earnings growth, and made a number of points. First, the level of the natural rate of unemployment was uncertain, but it was plausible that it was lower than in the s, because of the structural changes that had taken place since then. Second, even if the natural rate of unemployment were below the current level, there might be a  speed limit effect  - ie the faster unemployment fell towards the natural rate, the higher the rate of inflation. Third, some of the payments that were recorded as bonuses represented profit-sharing payments to staff, which would automatically decrease if profits fell. Such payments were akin in some respects to equity returns.##NewTopic##Prices##NewPara##The Committee discussed recent price data. RPIX inflation was stronger than had been projected in the August Inflation Report, and the staff analysis suggested that import prices had##NewPara##fallen by less than was expected given the rise in the exchange rate, and that retail prices had risen by more than was expected. In other words, the pass-through from exchange rate appreciation had been unexpectedly weak.##NewPara##The Committee emphasised that policy decisions had to be based on forecast inflation, rather than on current inflation, because of the lag between an interest rate change and its effect on output and prices. The unexpectedly small fall in RPIX inflation during the last few months had been accompanied by a widening of retailers  margins, which members thought reflected the strength of domestic demand. Members discussed whether the depreciation of sterling since August would have an upward effect on the domestic price level, but concluded that since the pass-through from the earlier much larger appreciation seemed to be incomplete, there was a good chance that the recent depreciation would have little effect.##NewPara##The dip in the twelve-month rate of inflation that had been expected in the August Inflation Report now seemed likely to be shallower, so that RPIX inflation might prove to be below   % for a shorter period than expected. Members noted that recent experience had been of above-trend growth accompanied by flat or declining inflation, but it was suggested that had it not been for the appreciation of sterling, the inflation profile would have been considerably less reassuring.##NewTopic##Monetary growth##NewPara##There was little new information. The Committee noted that, on the latest month s data, monetary growth, both narrow and broad, and M lending now seemed a little slower. It was acknowledged that the policy implications of recent monetary growth depended on the comparison with the earlier expectation of a gradual deceleration in the monetary aggregates as demand slowed.##NewTopic##Financial market developments##NewPara##The Committee discussed the impact of the perceived increased likelihood of the United Kingdom joining EMU on the yield curve. Implied future short-term interest rates were slightly higher at the March  maturity but much lower at  and  maturities.##NewPara##The Committee noted that ex ante real interest rates at the two-year maturity appeared to have fallen sharply in the last month.  Moreover, equity prices had risen and bond yields had fallen, and   the exchange rate had depreciated after the Financial Times story suggesting that the United Kingdom was likely to join EMU had appeared on  September. While acknowledging that markets were currently more than usually volatile, the Committee felt that the changes that had taken place during the month were likely to have a positive effect on aggregate demand.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Though the monetary data now looked a little more encouraging than in previous months and earnings growth had not accelerated, a number of the developments that the Committee had surveyed pointed to somewhat faster output growth than had been expected. It remained probable that economic growth was about to slow down, although one or two quarters later than expected.##NewPara##Members discussed how recent developments affected the inflation outlook. Output and demand were stronger in Q than had been expected, and it was possible that net exports would remain stronger than projected. Taken together with the effects of changes in asset prices and the exchange rate, this suggested that the level of output might be higher than expected in relation to the productive capacity of the economy, so that inflation might be higher than the August projection. The absence of much reduction in RPIX inflation in the past few months suggested that the expected dip in the twelve-month rate of inflation might be shallower than previously thought, and that when inflation began to increase it would do so from a higher starting rate.##NewPara##Members discussed how policy should react to this situation, bearing in mind the statement in the August Inflation Report that  ... the Monetary Policy Committee concluded that monetary policy has now reached a position at which it should be possible to pause in order to assess the direction in which the risks are likely to materialise .##NewPara##Members considered whether a rise in interest rates was needed in order to meet the inflation target. The prospects for weaker net trade - supported by survey evidence of lower exports in the near term - suggested that output growth was likely to fall. Two possible interpretations of this outlook were discussed. The first was that the impact on domestic demand of the monetary and fiscal tightening earlier this year would be sufficient to slow down the economy, and so the need for a further rise in interest rates was not yet clear. One argument in support of that proposition was the failure of earnings growth, adjusting for the timing of bonuses, to rise this year. The second interpretation was that the early indications of strong growth in the third quarter meant that the slowdown had at least been deferred, and so the risks to the inflation outlook were clearly on the upside. On that interpretation, there would need to be a further significant rise in interest rates in order to meet the inflation target. The Committee agreed that it did not, as yet, have sufficient information to feel confident in choosing between these two interpretations.##NewPara##The Committee considered whether, if a rise in interest rates were needed, it would be better to implement it immediately, or to make no change this month but with the expectation of an increase in November. The arguments for an immediate move were that any delay would carry the risk that##NewPara##the eventual increase might need to be larger than would otherwise have been the case. Moreover, if there was an inhibition about moving other than in steps of  %, and the necessary increase was more than  %, then it would be better to start the process of increasing rates immediately. The arguments for waiting a month before raising interest rates were as follows. First, in practice it was unlikely that a delay of a month would make a significant difference to the economic impact of a rise in interest rates, should a rise prove necessary. Second, there was no reason why interest rates should not move in steps of more than  %, or indeed less, if circumstances warranted it. Third, a large amount of quarterly information would become available before the next meeting - the CBI quarterly survey, the preliminary estimate of GDP in Q, the Labour Force Survey, the money figures for Q, including sectoral money holdings and estimates of Divisia money. Moreover, work on the November Inflation Report, which would take place before the next meeting, would enable the Committee to make a new inflation forecast. Members preferred to wait another month to see how the evidence on the balance of risks accumulated.##NewPara##In the light of the discussion, the Committee voted unanimously to leave interest rates unchanged this month.