The world economy##NewPara##In advance of the Committee s last scheduled meeting on - September, there had been some indications that the downturn in the US economy might be coming to an end. However, data released soon after that meeting suggested that recent economic performance and the near-term outlook were weaker than had been thought. Non-farm payrolls had fallen by , in August; the National Association of Purchasing Managers  (NAPM) survey index for August for non-manufacturing was down from . to . and was consistent with declining output; and the Michigan index of consumer confidence was also sharply lower. The Wilshire index of equity prices had fallen by  % between  and  September. However, the data for consumption in August, which were released at the beginning of October, still suggested resilience, with consumption .% higher than a year before.##NewPara##The extent to which the terrorist attacks in the United States on  September would affect the economy was unclear. Early indications suggested a significant fall in retail sales in the week of the attacks, and there was evidence of only a partial recovery. Survey evidence suggested setbacks to both activity and confidence: the final Michigan index of consumer confidence for September was even lower than the preliminary figure released before the attacks. Some sectors, such as air travel and tourism, had been hit especially hard.  Overall, while the direction of the immediate impact was clear, it was too early to assess the magnitude or the duration of the effects.##NewPara##Looking further forward, while demand would, to some extent, switch into other sectors, there would inevitably be a period of dislocation as capacity was reduced rapidly in the worst-affected sectors but took time to respond in the sectors where demand was increasing. There might also be more persistent effects on productivity and costs, as the perceived need for security precautions increased and insurance costs rose. A general increase in uncertainty could lead to a greater reluctance to make commitments and an increase in risk premia in financial markets. Despite a recent recovery##NewPara##equity prices had fallen since  September, which would reduce households  wealth and would tend to dampen consumption. So there were elements of an adverse shock both to demand and supply. The setback to demand would tend to reduce inflationary pressure, while the effects of the supply shocks would tend to raise it.##NewPara##The fall in the price of oil, to below $ per barrel, from about $. at the time of the Committee s - September meeting and a high of close to $ just after the attacks, would reduce inflationary pressure if it were sustained. While political uncertainty in the Middle East might otherwise have raised the oil price, the weaker outlook for world activity had so far constituted a stronger deflationary influence. Oil futures and options prices suggested that the market s central expectation was for the price to remain around the current level.##NewPara##In the euro area, the extent of the continuing weakness in activity and confidence was a puzzle. Earlier in the year, real disposable incomes had been adversely affected by the rise in oil prices and the weakness of the euro, but both these factors had unwound to some extent. The euro area had shared in the global shock to the information and communications technology (ICT) sector, and the downturn in the United States had reduced demand for euro area exports. Nevertheless, it was surprising that the French and German stock market indices had both fallen by around % since the Committee s scheduled September meeting, significantly more than the corresponding fall in the Wilshire or the FTSE All-Share index. The latest evidence, from surveys taken after  September, suggested further economic weakness. The euro-area manufacturing PMI had fallen from . in August to . in September. The services sector PMI had fallen from . in August to . in September, suggesting that activity in services was now also contracting.##NewPara##In Japan, industrial production, exports and confidence were all declining. It was not clear what factors would revive growth. The Asian emerging economies had been severely affected by the global ICT shock and the associated fall in US imports, as well as by the weakness of Japan. The impact of the terrorist attacks on the US economy could well delay their recovery.##NewPara##Monetary policy had responded to the weaker outlook in all the major economies, but there was uncertainty as to how quickly and to what extent activity would respond. In the United States, the Fed funds target rate had already been reduced by  percentage points since the beginning of the year, and the present target level of  % left rather less scope for further reductions. The typical lags in the##NewPara##monetary transmission mechanism meant that the full impact of this decisive policy action would not be evident for some time. Meanwhile, output growth had continued to slow, and there was a risk that confidence might be adversely affected if the economy appeared not to be responding.##NewPara##It was also relevant that fiscal policy might become more expansionary, both in the United States, with further tax cuts and increased military expenditure likely, and in the euro area, where it now seemed that automatic stabilisers would be allowed to operate.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The revisions to UK National Accounts data, published in the annual Blue Book on##NewPara## September, showed that domestic demand and output had been stronger in the first half of this year, and the imbalances within the economy more pronounced, than previously thought. The upward revisions to consumption, investment and stockbuilding would by themselves have suggested stronger prospects for output growth than in the August Inflation Report projections. The new estimate for consumption growth in the second quarter was .%, so there was now little evidence of a slowdown so far this year. This was also consistent with the more recent data for retail sales and household borrowing. Investment growth in the second quarter had been revised up from .% to .%, consistent with the bounce-back which the Committee had expected after the exceptional fall in the first quarter. Although the contribution from stockbuilding (including the alignment adjustment) had been revised down in the second quarter, data revisions further back implied that the stock/output ratio, which had previously been trending downwards since , now appeared to have been broadly stable since . However, these upward revisions to demand and output did not necessarily imply greater inflationary pressure going forward.  The revisions to the level of output were largest for  but there had been no systematic revisions to the level of the GDP deflator. The capital stock had also been revised upwards, which helped to explain why the higher level of output had been consistent with a broadly unchanged estimate of the GDP deflator.##NewPara##Data for exports and imports had also been revised. It was surprising that imports were estimated to have fallen by % in the second quarter, given that consumption and investment were now believed to have been strong. Imports of ICT goods, in particular, had been weak. But there was a growing inconsistency between European Union countries  estimates of their exports to the United Kingdom and the ONS measure of UK imports from them. It was possible that the net trade##NewPara##contribution to GDP in the first half of the year could eventually be revised downwards, although this would not necessarily affect estimates of GDP growth because it could be offset by a compensating revision to the alignment adjustment.##NewPara##Recent survey evidence, which needed to be treated with particular caution given the likely immediate (but perhaps short-lived) effect on it of the terrorist attacks, was mixed but tended to suggest weaker activity going forward. The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) services index fell to . in September from . in August. Given the past relationship between the survey data and services output, this was consistent with service sector output growth being above trend in the third quarter but continuing to slow. The CIPS manufacturing PMI had been much the same in September as in August, though incoming orders had fallen further. The CBI Distributive Trades Survey showed a rise in retailing activity in September. The GfK survey for September had shown a fall in consumer confidence, and the MORI poll, which referred only to consumers  judgments about the overall economy rather than their own personal circumstances and was taken later in the month, showed a much larger fall. Moreover, the prospects for consumption had been adversely affected by the recent fall in equity prices and hence in personal financial wealth.##NewPara##The Committee noted that the fiscal implications of a military response to the terrorist attacks were probably limited, in the light of experience from the Gulf War and action in the Balkans.  The  more substantial effects were likely to be on business confidence, and reports from the Bank s regional Agents already suggested an adverse effect. Labour hiring and discretionary spending decisions were likely to be deferred for a while, to allow time for the situation to clarify, and investment could be reduced as businesses added a risk premium to the rate of return they required and planned for slower growth in revenues.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##Money and credit data were consistent with other evidence suggesting that the divergence between the household and corporate sectors had widened further: the rate of growth of households  deposits and borrowing had increased in August, while the growth of corporates  deposits and borrowing had declined. Housing loan approvals had risen rapidly in the three months to August. The evidence on house prices in September was mixed: the Nationwide index showed a .% rise on the month, but the Halifax index was unchanged, and the RICS balance of price expectations for the next##NewPara##three months showed a sharp fall.##NewPara##The reaction of the foreign exchange markets to the terrorist attacks had been relatively muted, suggesting that the market had seen the attacks as implying a broadly similar effect for all the major economies. The dollar had fallen by less than  % against the euro since  September. Sterling s exchange rate index (ERI) fell by about  % over the same period and by about % on the month.##NewPara##UK equity prices had fallen: the FTSE All-Share index was  % lower on the month but, after a recent rally, only  % lower since  September. The latest fall could reflect lower central expectations for company profits in the wake of the attacks, but the equity risk premium might also have risen.  It was possible that the equity market had recently taken encouragement from the  resilience of equity prices in the United States.##NewPara##There had been a striking change in the shape of the gilt yield curve. Short-term interest rates had fallen, but longer-term nominal forward interest rates had risen somewhat on the month. The rise was accounted for by a rise in the real forward rates derived from yields on long-term index-linked bonds, and there was no evidence of a rise in inflation expectations. Long real spot rates had not risen in other markets. The Committee noted several alternative explanations for the change in the shape of the forward rate curve : the inflation risk premium might have risen; the market might have raised its expectation for the amount of government bond issuance; and the Financial Services Authority had recently relaxed its resilience tests for insurance companies, which might otherwise have been induced to move out of equities into gilts. The last possibility would represent unwinding of a previous distortion in the gilt market.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Labour market data had been broadly in line with expectations. The rate of unemployment by the LFS measure was unchanged in the three months to July, at %, although the claimant count measure had continued to fall in August. The growth in LFS employment had slowed in the three months to July, and temporary employment, in particular, had fallen. It was probable that, at the beginning of a downturn in employment, temporary employees would be affected first, but these data were volatile.##NewPara##The headline figure for annual earnings growth had eased in July to .% from .% in June and over % earlier in the year. The effect of bonus payments continued to be strongly negative: regular pay growth in the private sector was stable at around %. Public sector regular pay was increasing more rapidly, at around %, which was considerably above settlements in this sector. Threshold and arrears payments associated with the introduction of new pay arrangements for experienced teachers accounted for some of this figure, but the gap between settlements and earnings growth had also increased in health and public administration. It was possible that this reflected the tightness of the labour market.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Pressure on costs remained subdued. The recent fall in oil prices was an important influence, but other commodity prices had been falling in recent months so that the annual increase in the Bank s non-oil index had fallen from over % at the start of the year to about % in August. The CIPS manufacturing survey for September suggested that the rate of growth of input costs was at its lowest since , despite the rise in insurance costs and before the benefit of the fall in oil prices over the previous three weeks had come through.##NewPara##Nevertheless the -month increase in RPIX, at .% in August, was . percentage points higher than in January even though many excise duties had not been indexed in the Budget; and RPIY had increased by . percentage points since January. At least part of the . percentage point rise in RPIX could be accounted for by factors which were arguably temporary: food prices, which had been affected by poor winter weather and then the foot-and-mouth epidemic;  and utility and used car prices, where in both cases prices had been exceptionally low in .##NewPara##With strong growth in consumption and subdued producer price inflation, there was some evidence that retailers  margins were beginning to recover. The rate of deflation in the household goods sector had slowed in the last two years, as the effects of the exchange rate appreciation beginning in  had worn off.##NewTopic##Possible tactical considerations##NewPara##The Committee noted that there was a widespread expectation in financial markets that the repo rate would be reduced by .% at this meeting: the .% reduction agreed at the special meeting on  September had generated expectations of a further reduction. The Committee recognised that confidence considerations were of particular importance in current circumstances.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The economic news on the month suggested that, prior to the terrorist attacks, the outlook for the world economy had weakened by more than expected, particularly in the euro area. In the United Kingdom, the revisions to National Accounts data suggested that imbalances in the economy were more pronounced than previously thought. The level of final domestic demand, notably of consumption, had been revised up since , in particular for the first half of . But the recent decline in business confidence suggested that the prospective slowdown might be more rapid than previously envisaged. The terrorist attacks had had an immediate adverse impact on confidence at home and abroad, but consumer spending in the United Kingdom appeared relatively unaffected so far. There had also been a mixed response in financial markets. The foreign exchange market had reacted less than might have been expected; yield curves had steepened; associated with an increase in uncertainty, there was some evidence of a rise in risk premia which could dampen activity, for example by reducing equity prices; and the fall in the oil price would ease inflation pressures in the##NewPara##near-term. The medium-term implications were unclear and might not entail a lasting effect on growth or inflation. Finally, monetary policy abroad had been eased. Against this background, the key issues were whether interest rates were now at a level which would maintain domestic demand growth at a rate sufficient to keep inflation on track to meet the target in the medium-term; and whether there was  in addition a case for reducing rates further to sustain confidence, until the likely economic consequences of the terrorist attacks became clearer.##NewPara##Given the .% repo rate  reduction which had already been made at the special meeting on  September, some arguments were identified against a further reduction. The revisions to the National Accounts data suggested that domestic demand had been stronger than previously thought in the first half of the year. A further repo rate reduction might worsen the current imbalances in the economy, to the extent that it could further stimulate the housing market and the growth of consumer##NewPara##borrowing. RPIX had risen above its target level, although this reflected temporary factors and input price developments suggested inflation pressures were subdued. The economic consequences of the terrorist attacks, and of the military response, were uncertain and the Committee could make a fuller quantitative assessment in the November Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##All members of the Committee, however, thought that a repo rate reduction was warranted. The weakness of the global economy had become increasingly apparent and widespread: the euro area, Japan, and the emerging markets, as well as the United States, were all weaker than previously thought. There were some signs in the United Kingdom that the labour market was around a turning point. The prospect of higher unemployment coupled with lower equity prices would depress consumer spending going forward. While there were both demand and supply elements to the shock from the terrorist attacks, the demand effects, which would dampen inflation, were likely to predominate. The attacks were likely to reinforce and prolong the weakness of the global economy. Several sectors, such as airlines and insurance, had been particularly adversely affected. While early indications were that the immediate impact on UK consumption had been temporary, business confidence was likely to be more seriously affected. More generally, reports from the Bank s Agents suggested that some investment decisions were likely to be deferred.##NewPara##Most members concluded that a  basis point reduction in the repo rate was warranted now. The two main arguments for this reduction were the weakness in the world economy prior to##NewPara## September that was now evident in the data, and to counter the impact of weakening confidence on business activity. For some members, a reduction of  basis points at this stage might well damage rather than sustain business confidence. It should be clear that the Committee stood ready to act in either direction going forward: further weakness in the world economy might require additional reductions in interest rates, but, if the world economy recovered, it might well be necessary to raise rates to contain domestic demand, and past experience suggested that such action might need to be taken quickly.##NewPara##On another view, there was a case for a larger reduction in rates. On this view, the August Inflation Report projection for inflation had, at the time, been too high because the forecasts for the global economy were even then over-optimistic. The weak data on the global economy that had emerged since had confirmed this view. The reports from the Bank s Agents of a recent steep deterioration in business confidence were particularly important. The National Accounts revisions##NewPara##suggested an upward revision to potential output as well as past output and demand, so that the pressure of current demand on inflation might not be much higher.  The CIPS services survey suggested that this sector was weakening.   While global equity prices had recovered much of the   ground lost since the terrorist attacks, the full extent of the fall since the August Inflation Report was very significant. Overall, the balance of the economic impact from the attacks was much more negative for demand than supply, which implied downward pressure on inflation. There was a possibility that the political and military situation could turn out worse than currently envisaged, which would raise risk premia and so weaken equity prices and activity further. Moreover, the money market curve could imply a rate as low as % by December, and the recent recovery in equity prices was predicated on this market expectation of significantly lower interest rates. A repo reduction of  basis points would help to buttress business confidence and was appropriate now.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be reduced by  basis points to .%. Eight members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, David Clementi, Christopher Allsopp, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Stephen Nickell and##NewPara##Ian Plenderleith) voted in favour. Sushil Wadhwani voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.