The world economy##NewPara##The Committee considered the slowdown in the US economy and the recent monetary policy action by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Some slowing of growth in the United States, to bring it down to a more sustainable rate, had been necessary for some time and it was welcome that the data confirmed that that was happening. The consensus was now for the US economy to grow by between % and % this year. That was lower than the Committee s November Inflation Report projection. But if the strong productivity performance of the US economy in recent years were to persist, a speedy return to sustainable growth remained plausible. Furthermore, expectations that monetary policy would respond to the prospect of a prolonged downturn made such a downturn less likely than some commentators feared. Some fiscal stimulus also seemed likely, later in the year, and that too would support recovery.##NewPara##The Committee also discussed an alternative scenario, that overcapacity in the US economy might lead to a more pronounced and sustained downturn. The US investment boom of the last few years had been predicated on expectations of continued rapid growth of demand and a very low cost of capital, especially for equity-financed firms in the high-tech sector. Those two supports for investment had now disappeared, and investment growth had fallen sharply. It was possible that overcapacity was not confined to the automobile industry but was quite widespread. On that view, the investment pause could be prolonged, with consequences for asset prices, wealth and confidence which would further reduce consumption and in turn compound the overcapacity problem. New orders for high-tech goods were now falling, having until recently grown at % a year, and the frequency of profit warnings suggested that trading conditions were still deteriorating. By no means all the recent investment could be justified by underlying improvements in the productivity##NewPara##performance of the economy: there had been evidence of over-optimism and misperceptions of likely returns. Equity values in some sectors still seemed hard to reconcile with business prospects, despite the downward adjustment in prices that had already taken place. On this view, it was unlikely that growth would pick up quickly and it would not be easy to deal with this by monetary action. But it was also possible that any problem of overcapacity in the information, computers and telecommunications (ICT) sector was likely to be transitory, not least because ICT capital depreciated quickly and would need to be renewed. In addition, the current level of nominal interest rates was low by historical standards. So despite high levels of indebtedness, debt servicing burdens were not as onerous as in previous cyclical downturns and were therefore less likely to prompt a generalised sharp contraction in the availability of credit.##NewPara##Related to the risks from possible overcapacity, there was also a risk that business and consumer confidence might weaken further, with a widespread loss of confidence that recent productivity gains would persist. If that were to occur, a self-reinforcing downturn in sentiment could set in. For some members, this was a downside risk to which they attached a rather higher probability than others and which would be associated with a substantially worse outturn. Others noted that sentiment could on the other hand stabilise, helped by the FOMC action.##NewPara##Turning to conditions in the rest of the world, the recovery in the Japanese economy was now looking less robust and growth in some Asian economies had also slowed. But the cut in US interest rates had been welcome to a number of countries and the substantial softening of the price of oil, which had fallen % in dollar terms since the Monetary Policy Committee s December meeting, would help to offset the effects of lower demand from the United States. The recovery in the value of the euro, combined with the fall in oil prices, had improved confidence within the euro area and would ease inflationary pressures there.##NewPara##The key question however was the extent to which the slowdown in world activity would affect the United Kingdom. The direct effects through trade were unlikely to be very large. But other channels such as direct investment and linkages through financial markets could be important. The broader US and UK equity price indices had been highly correlated##NewPara##over the past twelve months. Financial fragility in the United States could lead directly to lower UK equity prices, reduced income from direct investments in the United States and slower growth in the UK financial and business services sector (which had contributed on average . percentage points per annum to UK growth through the s and could be disproportionately affected by a US slowdown). Were these risks to materialise, they could together have a substantial effect on UK growth.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##Taken as a whole, there was little news in the recent UK GDP data release: growth in the third quarter had been .%, giving growth on the year of .%, and the level of GDP had been revised up by .%. Nominal demand growth was being supported by rapid expansion of money and credit, which was growing much faster than in the early part of  and did not suggest an imminent slowdown in the pace of output growth. However, final domestic demand had increased by only .% in the third quarter, somewhat less than had been projected in the November Inflation Report.##NewPara##The information on the composition of growth in the third quarter was perhaps more significant. Consumption growth was more buoyant than had previously been expected, at .% in the third quarter, and was underpinned by high levels of borrowing. This was presumably supported by the gains in housing wealth over the past few years and by expectations of future wage income growth, rather than by equity wealth, and by the greater ease with which financial markets now enabled households to borrow against housing wealth. Household consumption growth still showed no obvious signs of slowing: growth in the fourth quarter now seemed likely to be somewhat faster than previously expected and##NewPara##possibly above that recorded in the third quarter, retail sales were growing at an annual rate of around % on the three-month comparison and car registrations had increased sharply on a year earlier in each month of the fourth quarter. Car sales might not make as large a contribution to overall growth in the fourth quarter as they would to consumption, because they were likely to be met in part by reductions in the level of stocks.##NewPara##By contrast, investment growth had again been slower than had been projected and (excluding  valuables ) investment was now recorded as having fallen in the third quarter. This was puzzling, as corporate finances remained sound overall and profitability (which included that of oil companies) had increased in the third quarter. In addition, surveys and reports from the Bank s regional Agents showed no obvious weakening in investment intentions. Survey indicators did not however present a consistently strong picture: recent information on consumer services and on business/professional services suggested some signs of weakening over the past three quarters. It would be a while before such surveys fully reflected the effects of recent news from the United States.##NewPara##Three possible explanations were suggested for the unexpectedly subdued pace of investment growth. First, that investment was being restricted by the supply of investment goods (this related particularly to those elements of investment which depended on construction, which had been badly affected by wet weather through the Autumn). Second, that difficulties in hiring labour had led firms to postpone planned investment for a while. In the longer term, they would either succeed in attracting the labour they wanted or would begin to substitute capital for labour. In either case, investment growth could be expected to recover. A further possibility was over-capacity, of which there was some evidence both in manufacturing and in parts of the service sector, notably in leisure-related businesses.##NewPara##Part of the puzzle presented by these consumption and investment data might relate to mismeasurement. The consumption deflator, for example, had increased more slowly than retail price inflation in recent quarters and it was therefore possible that the growth rate of real consumption was being overstated. It was plausible too that investment was being understated, because of insufficient allowance for the effects of quality improvements in the deflators used for ICT capital goods.##NewPara##Of the other components of aggregate demand, stockbuilding had been revised down in the third quarter and the ratio of stocks to output was below trend. It therefore seemed unlikely that there would be a substantial effect on overall growth from a turnaround in stockbuilding. Data revisions showed that net trade was making a less negative contribution to demand than had previously been recorded and the Bank s Agents reported that exports##NewPara##were growing strongly, though the contribution from trade would be vulnerable to a slowdown in world trade growth.##NewPara##Government consumption had been revised up, though both Annually Managed and Departmental Expenditures still seemed likely to be lower than planned. It was not easy directly to compare these fiscal numbers with those for government consumption. As with the consumption deflator, the government deflator was surprisingly low for the first two quarters of the current fiscal year and might be revised upwards. This, together with due allowance for the accruals adjustments included in the National Accounts and possible changes to the seasonal pattern of government spending, could reconcile the likely fiscal outturn with the currently recorded contribution of government spending to GDP. Any underspend could however result in a larger carry-forward of the amounts available to Departments to spend in future years.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##Growth of the main credit aggregates remained strong, with the twelve-month growth rate of M lending at .% in November and the annual growth of household credit at .%##NewPara##- only a little below its recent peak, of .% in June. Net secured lending to individuals had risen strongly in November.##NewPara##Despite weaker data on particulars delivered, leading indicators such as mortgage approvals data pointed to relatively stable conditions in the housing market. Recent price data had been mixed, but at this time of year were based on a very small sample. The rapid slowing in annual house price inflation now seemed to have ended. Current rates of house price inflation were broadly in line with the projection made at the time of the November Inflation Report and were not inconsistent with recent information on household consumption. Any renewed downturn in the housing market would probably not occur unless there were to be a loss of confidence associated with concerns about job security and employment prospects.##NewPara##In the UK equities market, recent movements had been concentrated on a limited range of companies and could be associated with special factors. The market as a whole did not seem to be expecting a substantial slowdown in UK growth. But equity values could fall further, following falls in the United States.##NewPara##Sterling s effective exchange rate had fallen some  % below the level implied by the starting point of the November Inflation Report projection. It had fallen by only .% in effective terms since the Committee s previous meeting, despite the euro having appreciated by over % against the dollar. Sterling had in fact risen in that period by nearly % against the dollar and over % against the yen, but had fallen  % against the euro.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Recent labour market data suggested that there had been no further tightening in the market, but it was not yet clear that it was starting to loosen. The Workforce Jobs measure of employment showed a fall of , jobs in the third quarter, to a level a little below that at the end of , and the Labour Force Survey (LFS) measure showed an increase of those in employment of only , in the three months to October, once the data were adjusted for the effects of new population estimates. It had been projected at the time of the November Inflation Report that unemployment would begin to increase towards the end of , and on the LFS basis it had now begun to do so (though the claimant count continued to fall). There was, however, some uncertainty about underlying trends because of the possibility that the petrol supply disruption and more general travel difficulties had affected the data from September. The sharp fall in self-employment in the most recent data release was also possibly erratic. Surveys of employment and employment intentions continued to look rather stronger than the official data.##NewPara##There was little news either on earnings or on settlements. The subdued growth in earnings recorded in the corrected New Earnings Survey for the year to April  was well below the comparable data from the Average Earnings Index (AEI). To some members this suggested that it was unlikely that the AEI had been understating the pace of earnings growth. The three-month average of pay settlements had moved up steadily, but no faster than might##NewPara##have been expected given the rapid rise in RPI inflation from the low point reached towards the end of . Settlements therefore did not seem to be reacting significantly to reported labour shortages and, with RPI inflation likely to begin to fall back into line with RPIX inflation in the coming months, might stabilise at not much above current levels and, some thought, might even fall later in the year. The latest reports from the Bank s regional Agents were that firms were on the whole comfortable with the likely pace of pay growth in the coming months.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##The sterling price of oil was over % lower than at the time of the November Inflation Report - its lowest level since May  - and the futures curve suggested that the dollar price of oil would be somewhat lower at the two-year horizon than it had been in that projection. The volatility in oil prices had contributed to the recent volatility in RPIX inflation, and some members thought that a measure of RPIX which excluded oil-related products would have undershot the target by significantly more than the headline measure. They pointed out that inflation had now been below target for nearly two years and that it was likely to be lower in the fourth quarter of  than projected in the November Inflation Report, so that there was a risk that the target would be significantly undershot this year. It was encouraging that the rise in output prices had been so muted, despite the earlier sharp rise in the price of oil: that suggested to these members that there was little inflationary pressure still to feed through from earlier increases in the price of oil. Other members were less confident that this was the case, and found it odd to isolate the effects of petrol prices and to ignore other factors, including the earlier unexpected rise in sterling; they therefore drew less comfort from it.##NewPara##The GDP deflator had increased only .% in the third quarter, and its annual rate of inflation had been revised down from .% to .%. That was significantly lower than in the November Inflation Report projection. Similarly, import price inflation had also been revised downwards and was lower than had then been projected.   It was possible that the GDP deflator might have been mismeasured. If it were in due course to be revised upwards, output growth might correspondingly turn out to have been slower than it currently appeared, though##NewPara##this was not necessarily true. But if the data were correct, that might suggest that the pace at which the economy could grow without giving rise to inflationary pressures had increased.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##For some members, taking the international and domestic outlooks together, the right course would be to leave interest rates unchanged this month. The main news from overseas concerned the US slowdown. The most likely outcome was, as emphasised by the Federal Reserve, a sharp slowing in growth from a previously unsustainable rate to a level which, after a bumpy quarter or two, would remain positive. There were certainly risks to this outlook. But a prolonged slowdown in the United States was likely only if business and consumer confidence fell to such an extent that the notion of a rise in productivity growth was rejected altogether. Though that was plainly a downside risk, it was not, on the basis of information currently available, the most likely outcome. Apart from inflationary pressures being contained, the factors cited by the FOMC as justifying their recent cut in interest rates (further weakening of sales and production, tight conditions in some segments of financial markets in the context of lower consumer confidence, high energy prices sapping purchasing power) did not have obvious counterparts in the United Kingdom. In addition, the UK equity markets did not seem to be as vulnerable as the US markets had become: they had risen less steeply, and so had less far to fall should a more fundamental reappraisal of prospects take hold.##NewPara##At the same time, for these members, the UK economy remained more robust than expected. Consumption continued to grow strongly and showed little sign of the slowdown that would be needed to accommodate the Government s spending plans without straining the productive capacity of the economy and so putting upward pressure on inflation. Money and credit growth remained strong. Although employment had shown little recent growth and there was no sign for the moment that market tightness was being reflected in the pace of earnings growth, there remained risks of inflationary pressures from the labour market. The immediate pressures on RPIX inflation had also lessened somewhat, particularly because of the recent falls in the price of oil, but it was less clear that there had been much change in the##NewPara##outlook for inflation over the medium term.##NewPara##Against this background, there were several arguments for not changing the repo rate this month. Some members attached particular weight to the uncertain extent to which the weaker US and world outlook would impact on RPIX inflation, and felt that it would be right to await the full assessment of these linkages that would be made in the context of the forthcoming Inflation Report forecast. There was no pressing need to change the repo rate now. Circumstances in the UK were significantly different from those which had prompted the FOMC to lower interest rates in the United States and to cut the repo rate today would send a misleading signal: indeed, it might damage confidence here rather than improve it, by giving unwarranted credence to the view that the circumstances were comparable. In any case, some monetary easing had already occurred, as loan rates (particularly those faced by house purchasers) and the exchange rate had fallen in recent months. It would be sensible to wait for clearer evidence that the labour market and the pace of consumption growth were easing, before relaxing the stance of policy. On balance, these members judged that it was not necessary to cut rates this month in order to achieve the inflation target.##NewPara##For some other members, while this analysis of the most likely outcome was broadly correct, the balance of risks had shifted sufficiently to the downside to justify a cut in the repo rate this month. Uncertainty in the United States could begin to affect business confidence in the United Kingdom, and delay a recovery in investment growth here. Admittedly, a cut in rates could better be explained in the context of the new forecast next month and, if made now, might wrongly be interpreted as merely a reaction to the cut in rates in the United States. It was possible also that, should confidence remain strong, an immediate cut in the repo rate would turn out to have been unnecessary. A purely reactive approach would not suggest that a cut was needed now.  But it was important to anticipate what might occur in the absence of a cut, with the possibility that confidence might weaken and then be harder to restore. With RPIX inflation below target, there was sufficient scope to cut rates this month by  basis points as insurance against the risk of a worse outcome without putting achievement of the target over the medium term in doubt.##NewPara##For some other members, the implications of recent developments in the United States and in the world economy more generally were more disinflationary for the United Kingdom and the risks to the world outlook more acute. There was evidence of significant overcapacity, not just in the United States but also elsewhere in the world, which could take some time to correct. Equity prices in the United States had risen by far more than could be justified by productivity improvements and asset prices remained vulnerable. The recent loss of confidence there had come as a surprise and its speedy recovery was by no means assured. Although it was quite likely that growth in the United States would match the consensus of between % and % and although it was also quite plausible that expectations of monetary easing there would underpin confidence, this could not be relied upon. The outlook in Japan seemed to have worsened again and the consensus view on prospects for the euro area could be a little complacent. The likely effects on the United Kingdom were not confined to trade and price channels: financial and confidence channels could be at least as important. Commodity prices (oil and base metals) had also fallen significantly over the month, in part due to expectations of a slowing in the international economy.##NewPara##Given that the Committee s remit was inflation, not demand, management, these members noted that the GDP deflator and other indicators of domestically generated inflation were all below  % and the outturn for RPIX inflation in the fourth quarter was below the November Inflation Report projection. RPIX inflation had been below target since April  and recent developments were likely to push it further below. There was in their view little prospect of returning to target unless action were taken soon. On this view too, not cutting rates this month also ran some risk of a fall in confidence that might prove difficult to reverse, so it was better to be pre-emptive and reduce the repo rate by  basis points this month.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. Five members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, David Clementi, Stephen Nickell and Ian Plenderleith) voted for the proposition. Christopher Allsopp, Charles Bean, DeAnne Julius and Sushil Wadhwani voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.