Financial markets##NewPara##The most significant development in financial markets had been a further fall in the US dollar, which had depreciated by around % against the euro and sterling since the Committee s December meeting, bringing its cumulative depreciation to over % in effective terms since the beginning of . The dollar had now more than retraced its rise against the euro since the beginning of , although it had recently not been as weak against the currencies of some other important trading partners of the United States, such as Japan and Mexico.##NewPara##There remained a risk that the dollar might fall further. The depreciation to date in effective terms was unlikely by itself to be sufficient to return the US current account to a sustainable level. The financing of this deficit had recently depended heavily on official purchases of dollar assets by overseas central banks, which could reflect a desire to build up liquid reserve balances as well as to resist the appreciation of their currencies against the dollar. Such purchases might not continue on the same scale. And there had been a tendency in the past for swings in the major currencies to overshoot long-term sustainable values. The Committee would need to assess further the full implications of the fall in the dollar for the world economy and the prospects for UK external demand in the forthcoming Inflation Report round.##NewPara##Short-term and long-term nominal interest rates had fallen materially in the United Kingdom, the United States and the euro area. The movements in US and UK short rates apparently reflected##NewPara##perceptions by market participants that the prospective tightening of monetary policy in both countries would be slower to materialise tha n previously believed. This change of view had been associated with lower-than-expected consumer price inflation in both countries, and   in the United States   with public comments by monetary officials that had been interpreted as meani ng that interest rates would remain low for some time to come , even though the statement released by the FOMC at the time of their December meeting suggested that the risks to inflation had become more balanced.##NewPara##The falls in US and UK long-term governme nt bond interest rates appeared to reflect a decline in real rates rather than in implied inflation rates. These movements did not appear easy to reconcile with some fundamental economic developments, such as the strength of US productivity and the prospective increase in the US fiscal deficit.##NewPara##Equity prices had risen slightly in most major markets, possibly supported by the decline in long- term interest rates as well as by strengthening global economic prospects. The emergence of accounting difficulties at Parmalat had caused a rise in that company s bond yields, but there did not appear to have been any significant general effect on European corporate bond markets.##NewTopic##The world economy##NewPara##The global economy had on balance strengthened since the November Inflation Report, although the news over the past month was more mixed. However, the rise in the euro against the dollar would adversely affect prospects for euro-area activity. Euro-area demand had a high weight in overall external demand for UK goods, so this would to some extent counteract the positive impact of stronger global demand.##NewPara##In the United States, the latest estimate for GDP growth in the third quarter was unrevised at .% over the previous quarter, and initial indicators pointed to continued strong growth in Q. Prospects for investment looked more solid than those for consumption. Estimates of corporate profits had been revised upwards, which was consistent with very strong productivity growth; industrial production, especially production of information and communications technology goods, had risen in November; and the Institute for Supply Manage ment s manufacturing index had reached its highest level for twenty years in December. Consumption had grown strongly in November. But consumer confidence had weakened slightly in December, and although non-farm payrolls had turned upwards##NewPara##over the past three months, they had been increasing by less than the rise in the labour force. In addition, estimates of the personal saving ratio had been revised downwards, which suggested an increased risk of an upward adjustment to saving at some point. There was little sign that inflation would start to pick up in the near future.  The annual growth rates of broad and narrow money had  both weakened in recent months, and the core CPI measure of prices had declined on the month in November for the first time since . Strong productivity growth, associated with falling unit labour costs, a low level of capacity utilisation and unemployment around % suggested that demand growth could remain high for some time without placing undue pressure on supply. However, monetary and fiscal policy were both highly stimulatory, and, together with the fall in the dollar and higher dollar prices for oil and commodities, were likely to imply upward pressure on inflation at some stage.##NewPara##Euro-area output growth in  Q had been stronger than expected at the time of the November Inflation Report, and prospects for the fourth quarter had also improved. But there were questions about the sustainability of the pickup. Domestic demand in the third quarter had been at the same level as in the second, so the rise in output rested entirely on the net trade contribution to growth. The magnitude of this contribution had been surprising given the strength of the euro over the past two years. Moreover, on the data currently available, it was difficult to identify the counterpart countries outside the euro area. The judgment that prospects for growth in  Q were improving rested in large part on survey evidence: the Purchasing Managers  Index (PMI) for manufacturing had risen in each of the six months up to December, and the PMI for services, although it had eased, remained buoyant. Only limited official data were so far available on activity in the fourth quarter. Euro-area industrial production had risen by .% in October, but French consumption of manufactured goods and German retail sales had both been weak in November. And given the strength of the euro it was not clear that the strong export performance reported for the third quarter would continue: if export volume growth had been maintained only by a reduction in exporters  profit margins, it might not be sustainable. Investment might also weaken if margins had been squeezed. However, if the stronger euro implied a rise in the terms of trade, and hence higher real wages measured relative to the price of consumer goods, it might result in higher consumption.##NewPara##There continued to be signs of a modest recovery in Japan. The estimate for GDP growth in  Q had been revised down from .% to .%, which was more consistent with the profile of the all-activity index. However, industrial production had increased strongly in October and November. Demand and output were growing strongly in the main Asian economies, with the exception of South##NewPara##Korea, and growth in the region did not appear to depend so much on that in the United States.##NewTopic##Money, credit, demand and output##NewPara##News on the growth of output and aggregate demand in the UK economy had been generally positive since the Committee s December meeting. The estimate of GDP growth at market prices for  Q had been revised upwards, although the level of GDP measured at basic prices was slightly lower because of revisions to earlier data. Both household and government consumption growth were now estimated to have been stronger than thought at the time of the November Inflation Report. Business investment had been revised downwards, and was still estimated to have fallen in the third quarter. But the statistical discrepancy between the estimates for output and income and for aggregate expenditure was unusually large, and it seemed possible that the estimated level of business investment might eventually be revised up. Early indications were that robust output growth had continued into the fourth quarter, matching and possibly exceeding the rate of growth of potential output. Manufacturing production had been stronger than expected in October, and business surveys for both the services and manufacturing sectors remained strong in November. Prospects for investment were underpinned by improving corporate profitability and cashflow and easier access to long-term finance through the bond and equity markets. Aggregate annual M growth had increased to .% in November, although the growth of corporate deposits, which had been particularly strong, might partly reflect temporary factors.##NewPara##The evidence on consumer demand was on balance positive, though the estimated saving ratio had been revised upwards.  The latter suggested that the risk to future consumption arising from a sharp upward correction to household saving might be less than previously thought. Indicators for  Q were more mixed. Retail sales had risen only modestly in November, but there was anecdotal evidence that while sales growth had also been slow early in December it had picked up close to Christmas, partly encouraged by price discounting. The GfK measure of consumer confidence had risen slightly in December, suggesting that the repo rate rise in November had not had an unduly adverse effect, although it was too early to reach a conclusive assessment.##NewPara##Household borrowing remained very strong, although the growth of unsecured credit had eased slightly in recent months. Past rises in house prices meant that secured borrowing was likely to grow strongly for some time to come. The housing market appeared to be strengthening. Housing loan##NewPara##approvals adjusted for the number of working days had risen in November; the November survey by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors showed a rise in sales and a fall in unsold stocks of houses; and both the Halifax and Nationwide indices had shown strong house price increases in December, again providing early evidence that the November repo rate increase had not adversely affected confidence.##NewTopic##The labour market, costs and prices##NewPara##There were again signs that the labour market was tightening. The Labour Force Survey (LFS) measure of the unemployment rate had fallen to .%, and survey indicators and reports from the Bank s regional Agents suggested that private sector employment was rising. Private sector pay settlements had been edging up for about a year, and it was likely that larger bonuses, notably in financial services, would push up overall earnings figures in the coming months. On one measure, whole-economy unit labour costs had risen by over % in the year to  Q; non-wage labour costs had been rising particularly fast, accounted for by employers  pension and social contributions. But current rates of increase in pay were still moderate, particularly when account was taken of the rise in retail price inflation since mid- and the increase in employees  National Insurance contributions. The pickup in employment and earnings growth seemed broadly consistent with the Inflation Report projections, and did not suggest that the labour market was overheating.##NewPara##RPIX inflation had been exactly on target at .% in November. Inflation measured by the new target measure, the consumer price index (CPI), had fallen to .%, which was a little weaker than expected and below the new target of %. However, prospective increases in utility prices meant that it was likely to rise closer to the target rate during the first half of .##NewPara##Global oil and commodity prices had been rising sharply in recent months in dollar terms. But this largely reflected the fall in the dollar; for example, the Economist commodity price index had risen by only % in sterling terms in the year to December, as compared with a rise of % in dollar terms. In a period of large movements in relative currency values, it was difficult to choose an appropriately neutral yardstick. However, it seemed that there was some upward pressure on commodity prices from the recovery in global activity.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##Most market participants did not expect an increase in the Bank s repo rate. The average probability attributed by respondents in the monthly Reuters poll to a . percentage point increase was %.##NewPara##The Committee considered the implications of the change in the inflation target, from .% on the RPIX measure to .% on the CPI measure. On the new definition inflation had been below its target over the past year, whereas on the old definition it had been slightly above its target for most of this period. However, given the lags between changes in the repo rate and their impact on output and inflation, monetary policy needed to be forward looking. The Committee had not yet formally agreed a central projection for CPI inflation through the comprehensive process of an Inflation Report round, but noted that the gap between RPIX and CPI inflation was currently unusually large and was likely to narrow over the forecast horizon as house price inflation moderated. Some two years ahead, the difference would probably be around half a percentage point, so the change in target variable combined with the change in numerical target should not have material implications for the current stance of policy.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##News from the world economy had on balance been positive since the November Inflation Report, with the United States showing strong growth and with developments in the euro area being more encouraging. The balance of news from the United Kingdom had also been positive, with output growth expected to be at or above trend in the second half of , although the level of output at basic prices had been revised downwards. Consumption was still growing steadily, and house price rises were once again above expectations. The labour market was tightening modestly, broadly in line##NewPara##with the November Inflation Report projections. Although consumer price inflation was currently well below its target, it was expected to rise in early , and upward pressure on inflation was expected  to build gradually over the medium term as demand growth put increasing pressure on supply capacity. The effect of the continuing weakness of the dollar on activity in the euro area and on external demand for UK output was a key uncertainty. The impact of the November repo rate increase on UK domestic demand was also not yet clear, but so far it did not seem to have had a significant adverse effect on consumer confidence, consumer demand or the housing market. The change in the Committee s##NewPara##inflation target did not by itself warrant a change in the current stance of policy because, at the two- year horizon, the gap between the two measures of inflation seemed likely broadly to match the change in the numerical target.##NewPara##Against this background, there were some arguments for an immediate rate rise, to which different members gave different weight. First, the November Inflation Report central projection, on the constant interest rate assumption, was that inflationary pressure would gradually be building over the next two years. If the economy continued to evolve as had then been envisaged, a gradual rise in interest rates would be necessary. Second, the news from the global economy since the November Inflation Report, although mixed, had on balance been positive. Third, domestic demand and output growth were on balance stronger than envisaged in November.##NewPara##Nevertheless most members agreed that it was not necessary to change the repo rate this month. First, there were few signs that costs and prices in the United Kingdom were currently rising more rapidly than had been envisaged in the November Inflation Report. Second, inflation expectations remained well-anchored. Third, there were material downside risks in the current conjuncture.  The fall in the dollar could put the nascent euro-area recovery at risk, and the euro area was a particularly significant source of external demand for UK goods. The decline in the dollar had also recently been associated with a modest rise in the sterling effective rate index, which implied downward pressure on UK activity and inflation. Fourth, the rise in indebtedness of UK consumers implied increased uncertainty about the effect of a change in monetary policy on consumption, and for that reason, changes in interest rates should be gradual. Finally, the success of monetary policy rested in part on the ability of the Committee to explain its decisions clearly. This was particularly important given the new target measure of inflation, the implications of which were best explored in the context of the next Inflation Report, which would be the first to contain projections for the CPI.##NewPara##One member, however, despite the above factors and risks, put particular weight on the continuing strong growth of household debt. If the repo rate were to rise as implied by current short- term market interest rates, household income gearing could rise from its current moderate levels towards levels last seen in the late s and early s. It was therefore appropriate to seek pro- actively to moderate the build-up in levels of domestic borrowing now, in order to reduce the risk of an abrupt adjustment to consumption further out. There was no evidence as yet that the November repo rate increase was bringing this about. Against the background of positive news from the domestic and##NewPara##world economy, a further rise in repo rate was therefore warranted. This would be a surprise to financial markets, though the surprise would be one of timing not direction, since expectations of a further rise in due course were already factored into market rates. An element of surprise might have more impact on consumption, particularly that element of consumer demand which emanated from increases in domestic borrowing, than one which was fully expected. That decision could be explained in terms of the underlying data.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. Eight members (the Governor, Rachel Lomax, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Marian Bell, Richard Lambert, Stephen Nickell and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. One member (Andrew Large) voted against, preferring to increase the repo rate by  basis points.