Financial markets##NewPara##Short-term sterling interest rates had fallen on the month, in common with euro and US dollar  rates. The major influe nces on sterling rates appeared to have been UK and US economic data releases and reaction to the Minutes of the Committee s October meeting. Very short-term interest rates had suggested no expectation of a change in the repo rate in November and only one of the economists asked in the latest Reuters survey had expected a change.##NewPara##The sterling yield curve was now more or less flat until the middle of , consistent with the average of economists  forecasts for the repo rate at end- from the Reuters survey. Indeed, both prices of options on sterling short-term interest rate futures and the distribution of responses to the Reuters survey suggested some perceived downside risk to interest rates in . The implied path of sterling, US dollar and euro official interest rates had flattened significantly since the August Inflation Report, apparently in response to weaker perceived global growth prospects, linked partly to higher oil prices.##NewPara##Longer-term sterling forward interest rates had also fallen on the month, with small declines in forward real interest rates and in implied forward inflation expectations.##NewPara##The main exchange rate news on the month had been a significant depreciation of the US dollar against most other currencies, apparently driven by renewed concerns about the sustainability of the US current account deficit. The sterling exchange rate index (ERI) had been stable since the Committee s October meeting. This had left the sterling ERI some % below its level at the time of##NewPara##the August Inflation Report. The Committee noted the same possible influences discussed at its October meeting: current and prospective UK domestic demand and the UK current account deficit.##NewPara##Equity markets had risen in the United Kingdom and euro area and were little changed in the United States since the Committee s October meeting. Since the publication of the August Inflation Report, equity markets had risen significantly, with the FTSE All-Share Index up by more than %. This was puzzling, especially given the sharp rise in oil prices over this period. The fall in market interest rates would have reduced the rate at which future corporate earnings were discounted in valuing equities. But, if this decline in rates had been a response to weaker economic growth prospects, that change in outlook would normally have implied lower growth in corporate earnings.##NewTopic##The international economy##NewPara##World economic growth in  was likely to be strong and broadly based. Some slowdown seemed likely in , but prospects remained good. This outlook was broadly unchanged since the August Inflation Report, although the news since the Committee s October meeting had been mixed for the euro area and the United States and slightly weaker for Japan.##NewPara##Oil prices had fallen on the month, but they had been volatile and the price of Brent crude had risen above US$ per barrel during the period. Oil prices remained at significantly higher levels than at the time of the August Inflation Report. The impact of oil prices on global growth would probably be relatively small if they remained around current levels, but there was a downside risk if business and consumer confidence were damaged.  There had been some signs of possible upward pressure of higher oil prices on inflation beyond the direct impact from increases in oil and petrol prices themselves.  In the euro area, the flash estimate for annual HICP inflation had risen to .% in October. In the United States, the annual rate of  core  CPI inflation had picked up to .% in September. The annual inflation rate for  core  intermediate goods prices in the United States was at its highest rate since May , although finished goods price inflation had been more stable.##NewPara##Euro-area output appeared to have been growing at around its trend rate in the first half of the year. Indicators for the second half were mixed but suggested continued steady growth. On the output side, euro-area industrial production had fallen in August after a small rise in July. Purchasing managers##NewPara##indices (PMIs) for manufacturing had dropped in October, the third consecutive monthly fall, but had risen slightly for services. However, both indices remained consistent with moderate expansion.##NewPara##Estimated GDP growth for  Q in the United States had been slightly weaker than expected, but consumption growth had picked up after dipping in Q. Indicators of likely growth in Q were mixed. The PMI for manufacturing had fallen in October but the business activity component of the PMI for non-manufacturing had risen strongly, and both indices had remained consistent with continued growth. Consumer confidence had fallen slightly from September to October, with weak employment growth remaining an important influence. But the weekly initial claims data had pointed to a possible revival in labour demand. Business investment remained robust, suggesting confidence in economic prospects. Perhaps consistent with continuing high investment, corporate net borrowing had turned positive again after a period in which US companies had made net repayments of debt, and many US companies were also holding large cash balances. In the near term, domestic demand would also be supported by the continuing stimulus from monetary and fiscal policy.##NewPara##The indicators for Japanese growth in the second half of the year seemed slightly weaker, but rising consumer and business confidence were consistent with a pickup in domestic demand after the slowdown in Q. Growth in China was reported to have eased slightly but from very high levels.##NewPara##Official Chinese interest rates had been raised for the first time in nine years.##NewTopic##Money, credit, demand and output##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, quarterly GDP growth had been provisionally estimated by the ONS to have slowed to .% in  Q. The September Index of Production release had been provided to the Committee ahead of publication, and it had shown a larger estimated fall in the output of the production industries in Q than had been incorporated into this preliminary estimate of GDP growth. Estimated output of the mining and quarrying sector in Q had declined particularly sharply from Q. But this appeared to have reflected a change in the timing of routine maintenance work in the oil and gas industries and should therefore prove to be short-lived.  Manufacturing output was also estimated to have fallen. Business surveys of manufacturers and reports from the Bank s regional Agents had also suggested weakening activity in the manufacturing sector in Q, but they had pointed to continued moderate expansion rather than a contraction. The Committee placed some weight on these alternative indicators and so judged that the Index of Production release had probably somewhat overstated the##NewPara##slowdown in manufacturing output growth. The ONS preliminary GDP release had estimated that growth in the services sector had slowed a little to .% in Q, which was broadly consistent with business surveys and reports from the Bank s Agents.##NewPara##Growth in  Q seemed likely to pick up to around trend. The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) PMIs for manufacturing and services in October had pointed to continuing growth, with new orders balances rising in both surveys. Other business surveys suggested a more mixed outlook but, overall, they were consistent with continued moderate expansion. On the one hand, indicators of business confidence had deteriorated. In manufacturing, this might have reflected the pressure of rising input costs on expected profitability rather than falling demand. It was possible that weaker confidence could lead to a postponement of investment and manufacturers  reported investment intentions had fallen in the CBI Quarterly Industrial Trends Survey. On the other hand, reports from the Bank s Agents had suggested tha t investment intentions remained fairly firm.##NewPara##Business investment still seemed likely to grow at a brisk pace given capacity constraints and increased corporate profitability in . Corporate borrowing had picked up recently, which might have been linked to financing of investment plans.##NewPara##It remained difficult to identify the demand counterparts to the easing of output growth in Q. Weak export growth was a possibility, perhaps affected by the appreciation of sterling in the first half of the year, although the more recent depreciation of sterling was likely to boost the contribution to growth from net trade in the future. Government spending might also have risen more slowly than expected in Q but the government s demand for resources was likely to continue increasing rapidly in the future.##NewPara##Growth in private consumption seemed likely to have continued in Q at around the same pace as Q. Retail sales had increased strongly in September and were estimated to have risen by .% in Q, which remained a robust rate of growth even if below the levels of the first half of the year. In the CBI Distributive Trades Survey, retailers had reported a pickup in the annual growth of sales in October from September. But the Bank s Agents had reported that the increase in sales had been on the back of heavy discounting, which would be consistent with the continued weakness of the retail sales deflator. Consumer confidence remained weak but it had risen a little in October, with a small reported increase in the willingness of consumers to make a major purchase.##NewPara##In October, for the first month in three years, both the Halifax and Nationwide house price indices had fallen. House price inflation appeared to have been slowing in all regions of the country in the third quarter. Most indicators of housing market activity and prices at different stages of the house- buying process confirmed the picture of a slowing market. For example, the number of mortgage approvals in September had been at the lowest level since August  and a Hometrack measure of market tightness comparing the selling and asking prices of houses had been falling steadily since April. As usual, the Committee had also seen a preview of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) survey for October, which had pointed to a continued balance of respondents reporting house price falls and a further decline in the ratio of average property sales to the average stock of unsold properties per surveyor.##NewPara##The annual growth rate of broad money, excluding holdings by  other financial corporations , had eased in September. But the growth rate remained high. Recent rapid growth might have been partly associated with a change in portfolio preferences towards bank deposits, implying a decline in the velocity of broad money circulation. But there was a marked contrast between rapid broad money growth and low and stable consumer price inflation.##NewTopic##Wages, costs and prices##NewPara##Although the labour market remained tight, the Labour Force Survey (LFS) had suggested a further small fall in the employment rate in the three months to August. Private sector employment had now fallen for two years. Business surveys were also consistent with some softening in employment growth, particularly in manufacturing and consumer services; and an informal special survey by the Bank s Agents had suggested that employment growth had been strong in the past six months but was likely to ease in the next six months. The LFS unemployment rate had also fallen in the three months to August, with a further rise in measured inactivity. Taken at face value, the rise in inactivity rather than unemployment might suggest reduced labour supply and a tighter labour market. But it was difficult to interpret without further analysis of the disaggregated data to see who the inactive were and how easily they might be drawn back into the workforce.##NewPara##Pay pressures had also remained muted. Annual whole economy earnings growth had been unchanged in the three months to August from the three mo nths to July. But annual private sector regular pay growth had increased slightly to .%, resuming the steady upward drift over the past ##NewPara##months following a period of stability. It was surprising that pay pressures had not been stronger. One possible explanation might have been that government reforms to the labour market over the past twenty-five years or, more recently, additional immigration or delayed retirement had altered the relationship between wage growth and unemployment.##NewPara##Inflationary pressures did appear to be building along the supply chain. Manufacturers  input prices had risen in September, largely reflecting oil prices. Manufacturers  output price inflation had also increased, and they seemed to have been able to rebuild margins despite rising input costs.##NewPara##Manufacturing output price inflation in the CBI Quarterly Industrial Trends Survey was close to a five-year high. But pressures were greatest in the prices of intermediate and capital goods rather than finished consumer goods, and so might take longer to pass through to consumer prices. Services price inflation also seemed more stable. In recent years, prices of intermediate and consumer goods imported into the United Kingdom had been falling whereas prices of goods produced in the United Kingdom had been rising, reflecting differences in the composition of UK imports and exports. This improvement in the terms of trade had partly offset the growing pressure of UK demand on supply.##NewPara##But recently there had been signs of increases in the prices of imported finished manufactured goods, and the depreciation of sterling would add to these inflationary pressures.##NewPara##Despite the evidence of price pressures earlier in the supply chain, CPI inflation had fallen to .% in September from .% in August. This was significantly lower than the Committee s central expectation earlier in the year, as, for example, illustrated by the fan chart for CPI inflation from the February Inflation Report.##NewPara##A key question was whether the current low level of CPI inflation reflected underlying changes in the economy or the effect of temporary factors. One possible underlying change was a more rapid rate of growth of potential supply in recent years than the Committee had previously assumed, perhaps as a result of productivity gains from information, communications and technology investment. If so, domestic capacity pressures might be weaker than currently thought. Productivity gains in retailing and distribution might have been one reason why cost and price rises in the supply chain had not been passed through fully to the consumer, and there might be scope for further such gains. A second possible change to the structure of the economy might arise from a changed relationship between wage growth and unemployment, as discussed in paragraph . A third might be that CPI inflation had become less responsive in the short term to changes in economic activity.##NewTopic##The November GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections to be published in the##NewPara##The Committee s central projection, based on the assumption that official interest rates followed the broadly flat path implied by the market yield curve, was for GDP to grow at around the trend rate over the next two years. Four-quarter GDP growth was projected to fall in the first year of the forecast to a little below its long-term average rate but pick up subsequently. Compared with the August Report, the profile was lower in the short term, reflecting the evidence of weaker growth in  Q, but higher further out because of the boost to activity from higher equity prices and lower profiles for official interest rates and for the exchange rate. CPI inflation was projected to pick up, reaching the % target after two years and continuing to rise a little thereafter. A limited margin of spare capacity, pricing pressures already working through the supply chain and the decline in the value of sterling gave upward impetus to consumer prices in the first year. Demand pressures were still evident in the second year of the forecast. But the direct effects of higher oil prices and the depreciation of sterling on the inflation rate moderated. The profile was broadly similar to that in the August Report.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the various risks   in both directions   around these central projections. The main ones related to the world economy; the prospects for house prices and their impact on consumption; and the reaction of wages and prices to demand and cost pressures.##NewPara##A key risk to the world economy lay in the oil market. The Committee might have underestimated the effect on activity and inflation of the rise in oil prices to current levels. Another risk to the world outlook was the possibility of substantial exchange rate movements associated with the eventual correction of the high US current account deficit. The possible consequences for UK activity and inflation would depend on the impact on activity in UK export markets and on how sterling exchange rates reacted.##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, house prices appeared to be correcting towards a more sustainable level relative to earnings. But it was uncertain what that level was or how quickly any adjustment would occur. The impact of house price movements on consumption was also a key uncertainty. The Committee did not expect a less buoyant housing market to imply a substantial weakening of##NewPara##household spending. But there was a risk that the Committee had underestimated the potential impact. Overall, the risks from the housing market to GDP growth and CPI inflation were on the downside.##NewPara##There were a number of risks and uncertainties concerning how CPI inflation would respond to demand and cost pressures in the future. In particular, the Committee discussed the risks to its central projection that CPI inflation would pick up quite rapidly in  from the current level, which was below the target. A key question was whether the current low level of CPI inflation reflected underlying changes in the economy, such as an increase in productivity growth, that the Committee had underestimated and which could pose downside risks. Alternatively, the recent low CPI inflation outturns could have reflected temporary factors, such as falling profit margins of retailers, which, if they unwound rapidly, would prove upside risks to the Committee s CPI inflation projection.##NewPara##On the assumption that CPI inflation did pick up in  in line with the central projection, there might be further upside risks to inflation expectations and hence to inflation at a time when domestic capacity pressures were tight.##NewPara##Overall, however, the Committee s best collective judgment was that the risks to the central projections for both GDP growth and CPI inflation were on the downside. There was a range of views among members, though the differences were small.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##There had been a lot of news since the August Inflation Report. The US and Japanese economies had perhaps been a little softer than expected but world economic growth looked likely to remain robust and broadly based. Oil prices had been volatile and remained significantly higher than in August. In the United Kingdom, estimated output growth in the third quarter had been considerably weaker than expected and business surveys and reports from the Bank s Agents also suggested some weakening. House price inflation had been declining rapidly. The labour market, although tight, had not tightened further. But the fall in sterling exchange rates and market interest rates and the rise in equity prices since August would tend to support activity and raise inflation. Broad money and unsecured lending growth remained high. And inflationary pressures seeme d to be building in the supply chain, although CPI inflation had been lower than expected.##NewPara##Members concluded that no change in the repo rate was appropriate this month. Under the Committee s central projection, growth was near trend and CPI inflation reached the % target around the two-year point, rising a little thereafter. The economy was probably close to capacity and inflationary pressures seemed likely to build. But CPI inflation was below target at present and there were considerable uncertainties surrounding the Committee s projections, with the balance of risks somewhat to the downside. Inflation expectations seemed well anchored around the target. Different members gave different weights to these considerations but the Committee agreed that no change in the level of official rates was needed at this time in order to keep inflation on track to meet the target in the medium term.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.