Financial markets##NewPara##Short-term and long-term interest rates had moved up in the United States in the latest month. The rise in short rates reflected market perceptions that monetary policy would begin to tighten sooner than previously expected, following some stronger recent economic data, comments by monetary officials, and the statement issued following the May meeting of the Federal Open Markets Committee (FOMC). The smaller rise in longer-term forward rates reflected an increase in forward real rates. Interest rate movements in the euro area and the United Kingdom had been small. The current pattern of short-term rates suggested that the chance that the next change in the ECB s repo rate would be a reduction was believed to be less than in April. A  basis point rise in the UK repo rate at the Committee s May meeting was fully anticipated in financial markets; respondents to the latest Reuters survey of economists had almost unanimously expected a rise.##NewPara##The US dollar effective exchange rate had appreciated by about  % since the Committee s April meeting. Changes in interest differentials, to which the stronger US economic data had contributed, substantially accounted for the upward movement. Against that background, the effective exchange rate for sterling had fallen by over %. Changes in interest differentials could broadly account for the depreciation of sterling against the dollar, but only for a small part of its smaller depreciation against the euro, which had a much larger weight in the sterling effective exchange rate index. Overall, sterling still stood around % above the -day average incorporated into the February Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##There had been only modest movements in most major equity markets. The FTSE All-Share index had risen by over %. Within the FTSE All-Share, larger companies, which typically have greater international exposure, had on average outperformed others since the Committee s April meeting.##NewTopic##The international economy##NewPara##The latest evidence suggested that the recovery in the world economy had continued broadly as envisaged. World output and trade had grown strongly in , and the continuing recovery might be contributing to signs of emerging inflationary pressures. World demand weighted to reflect the pattern of UK exports was, as expected, growing somewhat more slowly than aggregate world demand.##NewPara##In the United States, estimated Q GDP growth of .% suggested that the recovery remained on track. An improvement in the labour market was apparently beginning to support consumer confidence, which, together with the tax rebates being implemented this year, should help to underpin consumption. Business surveys for April pointed to continuing robust growth. There had been some significant news about prices. The consumer price index had increased by .% in March to stand .% above its level a year earlier. While part of the rise was attributable to higher energy prices, measures of core inflation excluding food and energy were also rising. Employment costs had increased by .% in Q, the highest quarterly rise for a year. However, the annual rate of consumer price inflation was still modest and there was probably still some spare capacity in the US economy, with productivity growing strongly and labour participation likely to rise as employment increased. The statement issued by the FOMC after its recent meeting had suggested that the risks to price stability had moved into balance.##NewPara##The picture in the euro area was little changed over the past month. The Q GDP second release estimated growth to have been .%, which was a little less than would be consistent with the Committee s February projections, but the latest data for France suggested that the euro-area aggregate might be revised up slightly.##NewPara##The key issue for the Committee was to assess whether the euro-area recovery would continue. The latest data, although mixed, suggested that the downside risks had diminished. Looking first at demand, export growth had been modest in  Q, and looked likely to be so in  Q, with the effect of the global recovery offset by the appreciation of the euro during . The more recent euro depreciation and the continuing pickup in global activity should provide a modest stimulus to net trade in  and . Investment growth was positive in Q, but, within the aggregate, the strong contribution from Germany partly reflected a temporary boost from the imminent cut in subsidies to residential construction investment. The increase of % in retail sales in  Q suggested a pickup in consumption, which had previously shown little growth since  Q, and recent and prospective##NewPara##tax cuts in several countries might be supportive. Turning to output, indicators of euro-area business activity so far in  had been mixed. The purchasing managers indices for manufacturing and services, taken together, were consistent with a pickup in quarterly growth in Q. But annual euro- area industrial production growth had fallen slightly in February. German manufacturing foreign orders had also fallen in February, for a second consecutive month, possibly reflecting the influence of the stronger euro. Euro-area business indicators available so far for Q on balance suggested continuing positive output growth.##NewPara##The flash estimate of euro-area HICP inflation in April showed an increase to %. It was too early to assess the sources of the rise, but it was one of several factors which could have reduced market perceptions of the likelihood of a reduction in euro-area interest rates.##NewPara##The Asian economies in aggregate continued to grow strongly. Chinese GDP had increased by .% in the year to  Q, but the exceptionally high ratio of investment to GDP suggested that the pace of growth might not be sustainable. Early measures of activity in Japan indicated that growth had eased in Q, but it had probably been erratically strong in Q.##NewPara##The price of crude oil had risen further during the month. In dollar terms it was now at its highest levels since , and in the latest month it had risen when measured in terms of other currencies too: the sterling price had risen by some % since the Committee s April meeting. Several factors seemed to underlie this rise: the general global upturn in activity; the low level of private inventories in the United States; particularly buoyant demand from China; market speculation that OPEC would raise its target price range; and political events in the Middle East. These factors suggested that the balance of demand for and supply of oil might be shifting, so that the rise in oil prices might persist. Oil futures prices for a year ahead were % higher in dollar terms than at the time of the February Inflation Report. Other commodity prices had on average risen modestly in sterling terms since the Committee s April meeting. The implications for monetary policy of higher oil and commodity prices depended on whether inflation expectations overall remained well anchored.##NewTopic##Money, credit, demand and output##NewPara##The ONS provisional estimate of GDP growth in Q, at .%, had been materially weaker than envisaged in the Committee s February projections. Other evidence, such as business surveys and reports from the Bank s regional Agents, was consistent with a higher figure, and the Committee put##NewPara##some weight on this latter evidence. The available information suggested that underlying demand had remained strong, and a stronger figure for output growth would also be more consistent with the rise in employment.##NewPara##The latest evidence suggested that consumption continued to grow robustly. Retail sales had risen by .% in March, so that growth in the first quarter had been the highest since  Q, and the CBI Distributive Trades survey for April had also pointed to strength. Among the monetary indicators, household deposits and notes and coin (adjusted for various technical factors) maintained firm growth. The annual growth of total lending to individuals had remained above  % in March. The annual growth of unsecured lending had been unchanged overall at just over %, but within that credit card lending had increased sharply. It was striking that average lending rates on credit cards, personal loans and overdrafts had all fallen since October, before the first repo rate rise. This suggested strong competitive pressures in these markets, a conclusion which was reinforced by Bank contacts with several major lenders. Mortgage equity withdrawal had been very strong in  Q, and this looked likely to continue in Q.##NewPara##Alongside the growth in consumption, the latest indicators from the housing market also suggested strength in both prices and activity. The average of the Nationwide and Halifax indices of house prices had increased by % in the three months to April over the previous three months. This rate of house price inflation was significantly higher than had been envisaged at the time of the February Inflation Report. Estimated growth rates of secured lending to individuals going back for more than a year had been revised up, and the twelve-month growth rate had increased in March to .%. Housing transactions were at a high level, while loan approvals, and the ratio of housing sales to stocks in the March survey by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, pointed to continuing buoyant activity.##NewPara##The prospects for house prices were an important component of the Committee s assessment of the momentum behind household consumption. There were three key uncertainties: the extent to which house prices were above a sustainable level relative to earnings; the adjustment path of the house-price-to-earnings ratio back to a sustainable level; and the impact of house prices on consumption.##NewPara##The Committee s central projection reflected a judgment that the sustainable ratio of house prices to earnings was higher than its previous long-run average, but was still probably below the##NewPara##current ratio, so that house prices were likely to rise less rapidly than earnings at some stage. But there was considerable uncertainty about this judgment and its implications. The Committee noted, first, that there had been few past instances, either in the United Kingdom or abroad, when house prices had fallen without there having been a prior shock to economic or monetary conditions. The Committee s central projections, on the rising profile for interest rates implied by market expectations, showed steady growth and modest inflation, an outlook which in itself seemed unlikely to bring about a sharp correction in house prices. Second, investment demand for housing, including through the buy-to-let market, had increased rapidly in recent years. That had provided support for the marke t. It was now possible that either a fall in rental income relative to mortgage servicing costs, or a change in expectations about future house prices, could reduce this investment demand. Third, Bank contacts with the major lenders, although pointing to mixed views about whether the supply of mortgage lending would continue to grow as rapidly as in the recent past, suggested that most borrowers could service their loans at a significantly higher repo rate, provided that unemployment did not rise materially.##NewPara##The Committee noted that the growth in consumption in  had been underpinned by strong growth in personal disposable income, and that the relationship between house prices and consumption did not appear to have been as close recently as during the rise and fall in house prices in the late s and early s. Its central projection incorporated a judgment that this weaker relationship would continue to prevail, both in the near term, as house prices continued to rise rapidly, and later in the forecast period, as housing inflation slowed sharply. Nevertheless the central projection incorporated a slowdown in consumption growth. But there were clearly risks to this view in addition to those concerning the relationship between house prices and cons umption. On the one hand, consumption and its determinants had grown more rapidly than the Committee had expected for several years. On the other hand, the increases in house prices that had already occurred entailed a continuing rise in mortgage borrowing. That in turn meant that household income gearing was likely to rise over the next few years towards levels last seen in the early s. That could increase the vulnerability of the household sector, and hence of consumption growth, to changes in interest rates and to any unforeseen slowdown in income growth.##NewPara##Business indicators were consistent with a buoyant outlook for the corporate sector. The latest surveys from the CBI and the British Chambers of Commerce suggested that manufacturing continued to recover; the April surveys for manufacturing and services by the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) indicated high rates of activity growth; and new orders balances pointed to##NewPara##prospective further growth in services and manufacturing output.##NewTopic##The labour market, costs and prices##NewPara##Labour market conditions had continued to tighten slowly. Employment had risen by . percentage points in the three months to February, and unemployment had continued to fall. The CIPS survey of manufacturers had suggested that they were looking to increase employment. There was some anecdotal evidence of increasing skill shortages. Earnings had increased by .% in the three months to February, and although this mainly reflected a particularly strong contribution from##NewPara##bonuses, which was likely to be temporary, regular private sector earnings growth and settlements were edging up. Given the current tightness in the labour market, in order for output to continue to grow at faster than its historical trend rate without creating inflationary pressure, there would need to be a rise in underlying productivity growth, or an increase in labour force participation or inward migration.##NewPara##CPI inflation had fallen to .% in March, and both goods and services price inflation had weakened. It was likely that inflation would rise in the next few months, as utilities prices rose and because of a rising contribution from petrol prices, in turn reflecting both the recent rise in oil prices and, separately, the fact that the corresponding months a year earlier had seen particularly low prices. Recent business surveys and a special survey by the Bank s regional Agents pointed to a pickup in the inflation rate for domestic manufactures, and suggested that increasing cost pressures would be passed on to consumers. However, recent CPI data had been surprisingly weak, which might suggest that the competitive pressures on margins were stronger than the Committee had realised. Moreover, the prices of imported finished manufactures were falling quite rapidly.##NewTopic##The May GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections published in the##NewPara##The Committee s central projection, based on the assumption of the existing official rate of .%, was for GDP to grow at above its trend rate during . Then, as private consumption and public spending growth slowed, GDP growth was expected to ease back. GDP growth was expected to be slightly faster in the near term than in the February projections, largely because of a higher profile##NewPara##for consumption. But GDP growth was projected to be lower further out, reflecting weaker growth of consumption and a judgment that the path of the ONS measure of real government output would be lower than in the February projections. Utility and petrol prices were expected to exert upward pressure on CPI inflation over the next few months. But with output projected to exceed its trend level throughout most of the forecast period, underlying inflation was also likely to start rising, so that CPI inflation would somewhat exceed the % target rate by the two-year horizon.##NewPara##The Committee also examined projections for GDP growth and CPI inflation conditioned on an estimate of market expectations for official interest rates. These estimates implied a slightly higher level of interest rates by the end of the projection than in the equivalent projections in February. The profile for GDP growth was marginally lower than in the constant rate projections. The profile for CPI inflation was also lower, but still a little above the % target rate at the two-year horizon.##NewPara##The Committee noted various risks surrounding these projections. The main risks related to the outlook for the world economy, the prospects for exchange rates, the prospects for earnings, the degree of demand pressure on potential supply and, in particular, the prospects for house prices and consumption.##NewPara##Overall, the Committee s best collective judgment was that the risks to the central projections for both GDP growth and CPI inflation were broadly balanced. Committee members held slightly different views on the most likely path for inflation and on the balance of risks around them.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The balance of news on the month was consistent with a stronger overall picture for output and prospective inflation. Sterling had fallen by over %. Indicators from the world economy suggested that the recovery in activity was continuing broadly as previously expected, but consumer price inflation had risen in the United States and the euro area, and oil prices were materially higher. In the United Kingdom, the ONS provisional estimate of Q GDP growth had been surprisingly weak, but other evidence was consistent with a higher figure; indicators of consumption suggested continuing strength, and household borrowing growth had increased further; house price inflation had increased and indicators of housing activity were also robust. Business confidence was buoyant, investment intentions remained bright and, over a longer perspective, government spending growth was adding to the pressure of demand on resources. Labour market conditions were tightening, even though it was##NewPara##not clear how rapidly. Consumer price inflation had fallen, and was well below the target. It was, however, expected to rise in the next few months, though it was difficult to judge the extent of underlying pressure. It was possible that geopolitical risks had increased, but it was not clear whether, if any of those risks materialised, higher or lower inflation would result in the medium term.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that a rise in interest rates was appropriate this month. On the May central projection, and assuming the existing repo rate of .%, inflation two years ahead was projected to be somewhat above the target. On the market rate assumption, which entailed a rising repo rate through the forecast period, inflation would be a little above the target at the forecast horizon. Risks were broadly balanced around the central projection. It was therefore appropriate to raise the repo rate now, withdrawing some of the current monetary stimulus to demand.##NewPara##In presenting a decision to raise the repo rate, it would be important for the Committee to make clear that this did not imply that it was targeting house price inflation, or any other asset price. The significance of the unexpected acceleration in house prices was that it supported a stronger short-term outlook for consumption and output growth, and hence a steeper projected rise in inflation. It also increased the uncertainties relating to these projections.##NewPara##Arguments for a rise of  basis points were discussed. First, the forecast suggested that interest rates might need to rise more rapidly at some point than currently expected by the market. A  basis point rise could therefore be warranted by the Committee s central projection. Moreover, there were upside risks to this projection; for example, it was not certain that domestic demand would ease as markedly as projected. Second, if interest rates increased broadly in line with market expectations, inflation would be rising towards and then above target in the second year of the forecast period. A more gradual rise in inflation towards target, requiring a somewhat more rapid increase in interest rates than the market currently expected, would run less risk that above-trend output would lead to accelerating inflation further ahead.  Third, the surprise entailed by a  basis point increase might help to moderate the continuing rapid rate of increase in consumer indebtedness by affecting the behaviour of both borrowers and lenders, although even a  basis point rise would not by itself dampen consumer borrowing to any marked degree.##NewPara##There were also a number of arguments for implementing a smaller rise, of  basis points. First, current inflation was below the target and was projected to remain so for most of the next two years, and there were considerable downside as well as upside risks to this outlook. So even if it##NewPara##proved necessary for interest rates to rise a little more rapidly at some point than the market currently expected, there was, therefore, time to assess and explain further month-to-month economic developments before implementing a further increase if needed in the light of subsequent news.##NewPara##Second, although the argument for caution in raising the repo rate, given the uncertainty about the effect of interest rate increases on the economy, was now less persuasive than at the turning point in the repo rate last November, it should still be given some weight when contemplating a larger-than- expected repo rate change. Finally, there was a risk that a larger-than-expected rise now could be mistaken for a change in the Committee s reaction function, rather than as a response to the change in outlook given the news in recent months.##NewPara##All members, taking these arguments together, judged that the arguments for a  basis point rise were decisive.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be increased by  basis points to .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.