Financial markets##NewPara##Price movements in financial markets had been more significant than in recent months, with falls in short-term market interest rates and a depreciation of sterling against other major currencies.##NewPara##In addition to international factors, short-term sterling market interest rates had moved lower in response to the statement accompanying the August MPC decision and the Minutes, and in the light of UK data and surveys relating to the housing market, consumer spending and industrial production. Forward sterling interest rates pointed to a strong expectation that the Committee would leave the repo rate unchanged this month and expectations of any further rise before the end of the year seemed to have become less firmly held. None of the respondents to the Reuters survey of economists had expected a change in rates this month and the average of their expected rates for the end of the year had fallen slightly, to just under %.##NewPara##In contrast to the falls at shorter maturities, implied forward sterling real interest rates and inflation expectations had changed little on the month at maturities beyond five years.##NewPara##Since the previous meeting, the sterling effective exchange rate had fallen by nearly % to its lowest level since February. Market contacts had attributed the fall mainly to downward revisions to the expected path of sterling official interest rates. But movements in sterling market interest rates relative to overseas rates had been small and could account only for a small part of the steady depreciation over the month. At this stage the Committee found it difficult to assess what lay behind the depreciation and therefore whether it was likely to persist.##NewPara##Major equity markets had risen over the month, apparently partly in response to the fall in oil prices.##NewTopic##The international economy##NewPara##The broadly based global upswing looked set to continue, more or less in line with the August Inflation Report projections. Growth in the United States and Japan had slowed in Q from the brisk pace in Q, but seemed likely to pick up again in the second half of the year. In the euro area, overall growth appeared steady at near its trend rate. However, the news over the past month was consistent with some increased downside risks to global growth.##NewPara##In the euro area, GDP growth in Q had been estimated at .%. The expenditure breakdown suggested that net trade had made a larger-than-expected contribution to growth. Final domestic demand had continued to contract in Germany but had grown strongly in France and expanded in the euro area as a whole, although at a slower rate than in Q. Euro-area retail sales growth in June and July had suggested that private consumption would continue to grow in Q. Although the Purchasing Managers Indices for manufacturing and services had fallen a little in August, they were consistent with further expansion. Headline CPI inflation had been unchanged in August but had eased from May and June.##NewPara##Final domestic demand growth in Germany had been relatively weak since early . One likely explanation was that German real household disposable income had been flat since , partly reflecting falling employment. Much of the decline in employment had been in the construction sector, and construction investment had also been falling as a percentage of GDP since the mid-s, in part still a hangover from the construction boom following reunification. Another factor was likely to be uncertainty about various proposed structural reforms ; this might lie behind the rise in the German household saving ratio in recent years. Recovery in German domestic demand growth remained uncertain, although continued weakness in Germany seemed unlikely to undermine the upturn in the rest of the euro area.##NewPara##In the United States, estimated Q GDP growth had been revised downwards to .%, below the pace of growth in recent quarters. A marked slowdown in private consumption growth was perhaps in part related to the impact of higher oil prices on disposable incomes. But other factors might also have been important, including a slowing in the growth rates of both housing and net financial wealth, and##NewPara##temporary effects such as wet weather in June and reduced incentives to buy motor vehicles. Real consumption and retail sales had both risen in July following falls in June, with increased spending across many categories, including motor vehicles, but some of the indicators for August were more mixed. The rate of future consumption growth seemed likely to pick up in Q, although not at the brisk pace of Q. Survey-based measures of consumer confidence had weakened in August compared with July, and the Federal Reserve s Beige Book had reported that consumption growth might have eased in August from July. In part this might have been in response to the weak growth in non-farm payrolls in July, with consumers having a slightly less confident assessment of current labour market conditions. Non-farm payrolls had, however, risen by , in August and the estimated July increase had been revised upwards. But this rate of increase was still barely sufficient to keep pace with the growth in the US population of working age. Partly depending on the strength of the labour market, downside risks to future consumption growth had probably increased, although growth would remain underpinned by the continuing highly stimulatory stance of monetary and fiscal policies, and the steady rise in house prices.##NewPara##On the output side, US indicators were consistent with continuing robust growth. Both the manufacturing and non-manufacturing headline Institute for Supply Management indices had fallen back a little in August from July, as had their new order components. But they remained well above  no change  levels. Business investment had grown strongly in the first half of the year.##NewPara##In Asia, Japanese GDP growth in Q had also been weak, and heavily dependent on net trade, but again this slowdown seemed likely to be transitory. A pickup in machinery orders might signal stronger investment growth in the second half of the year. From the perspective of demand for UK goods and services, weaker growth in Japan in Q had been more than offset by rapid rates of expansion elsewhere in Asia, with inflationary pressures building in some of these economies.##NewPara##Despite the sharp rise during August, oil prices had declined somewhat over the month. OPEC oil supply had risen in July and there had been a build-up in US gasoline stocks as a result of weaker- than-expected US demand. The oil futures curve continued to point to a fall in prices to below US$ per barrel. But the implied distribution of future oil prices derived from options markets remained skewed towards higher prices, suggesting a perceived risk of a more pronounced rise in oil prices. And oil prices had risen steadily since the beginning of . If the current level was sustained, it would depress global economic growth to some extent, although the major economies were less sensitive to high oil prices than in previous decades.##NewTopic##Money, credit, demand and output##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, output and demand growth had been above trend in Q. Continued robust GDP growth was likely in the second half of the year, although there were signs that the pace of growth might slow a little in Q and be slightly weaker than in the August Inflation Report projections. In particular, growth of consumer spending appeared to be slowing in Q. There had been more signs that the housing market was starting to cool.##NewPara##The ONS had estimated GDP growth in Q of .%, unchanged from its preliminary estimate and in line with what the Committee had expected. Output growth had been broadly based, with the output of services and the production industries increasing at similar rates.##NewPara##There were, however, signs of a slight easing in the pace of growth in Q. Manufacturing output was estimated to have fallen by .% in July, although upward revisions to estimated growth in the first half of the year had left the reported level of manufacturing output .% higher than previously estimated. Business surveys had presented a mixed picture. For manufacturing, the output and new orders balances in the CIPS purchasing managers index had fallen sharply in August from July, although still indicating continuing expansion. But the CBI Monthly Trends Inquiry and the Bank s Agents had suggested a pickup in orders and output expectations. In the services sector, the CIPS index of business activity had risen in August, having fallen in the previous three months, but the index of incoming new business had continued to edge a little lower while remaining consistent with continuing growth. The Bank s regional Agents had reported an acceleration of activity in business services but a modest deceleration in consumer services.##NewPara##On the demand side, private consumption was estimated by the ONS to have grown strongly, by .%, in Q following the weaker growth of .% in Q. This profile might have reflected a pickup of estimated growth in consumption of services and net tourism in the second quarter. The Committee judged that consumption growth over the first half of the year was likely to have been smoother than currently reflected in the official data.##NewPara##There were signs that consumption growth might have slowed in Q. Retail sales volumes had fallen in July, the first monthly fall since May . The Bank s Agents had reported some easing in household spending. The CBI Distributive Trades Survey and BRC retail sales monitor had indicated##NewPara##that the annual growth rate of retail sales had fallen again in August. The GfK survey in August had suggested that consumer confidence had ticked down, with a reduction in willingness to make a major purchase. Private car sales had been lower than in the equivalent month in  for five consecutive months to August. The flow of secured and unsecured lending to individuals had fallen in July.##NewPara##Growth of notes and coins had also declined, although the twelve-month growth rate of households  holdings of broad money (M) had increased.##NewPara##It was unclear to what extent any easing in consumption growth might be temporary, perhaps connected to the unusually wet weather. The Committee had been expecting some slowing, reflecting in part that official interest rates had risen by . percentage points since November .##NewPara##An increasing weight of evidence suggested that the housing market might be cooling, with a range of indicators pointing in the same direction. House price inflation had been lower on both lenders  indices in August, with the Halifax index falling .% compared with the previous month. The July RICS survey of estate agents had shown a further fall in the balance of survey respondents reporting price rises in the previous three months. Indicators of housing market activity had also continued to weaken: new mortgage approvals for house purchase had fallen sharply in July and the July RICS survey had indicated a further fall in the ratio of respondents  sales to stocks. But even if the market had begun to cool, it remained highly uncertain how rapidly and by how much house price inflation would moderate, or indeed if it might pick up again for a time. The impact of any given change in house prices on consumption was also uncertain. The Committee judged that a turnaround in the housing market would restrain consumer spending to some extent. But as explained in the August Inflation Report, the weaker association between house prices and consumption in the past few years had led the Committee to judge that the relationship might also be less strong in the future as house price inflation slowed.##NewPara##Of the other components of domestic demand, growth in business investment had been estimated at .% in Q. But this was a volatile series. The Committee continued to expect robust growth in business investment as indicators of investment intentions suggested. Bank borrowing by private non- financial corporations had risen sharply in July, possibly linked to financing of investment plans. The twelve-month growth rate of M, at .%, was the highest since . If sustained, this might be consistent with continued strong growth of nominal GDP.##NewTopic##The labour market, costs and prices##NewPara##The news from the labour market over the past month had been on the weak side. Although still tight, it was unclear that the market was tightening further.##NewPara##Employment had fallen in Q, with the employment rate falling . percentage points, back to its level in  Q. The counterpart had been mainly a rise in inactivity, but unemployment had also increased. It was possible that these fluctuations reflected sampling error, with the pickup in the employment rate in Q being erratically strong and the underlying picture one of more stable employment over the recent past. Employment surveys continued to point to growth in the demand for labour. But the Bank s Agents had reported that growth in demand for workers in the private sector had eased slightly.##NewPara##It was puzzling that pay pressures had so far remained subdued given continued robust output growth and the apparently tight labour market. Whole economy wage settlements had been unchanged at .% in July; annual growth in regular pay and overall earnings growth had been flat in June.##NewPara##Three-month on three-month growth in regular pay, a measure of current pay pressures, had fallen in June to an annualised rate of .%, which was lower than the increase over the same three months a year earlier.##NewPara##CPI inflation had fallen to .% in July from .% in June, as the contribution from higher petrol prices had moderated and the  base effect  from falls in petrol prices in June  had dropped away. In line with the pre-release arrangements, an advance estimate of CPI inflation in August had been provided to the Governor   working days ahead of publication, and this had suggested a further fall in the rate to .%, which was in line with the Committee s expectations.##NewPara##Inflationary pressures continued to be felt along the supply chain, as rising demand for goods and services put pressure on firms  capacity to produce them. Producer output prices had been rising and manufacturers appeared to have widened margins. Surveys in August had indicated a larger balance of respondents in services and manufacturing expecting to increase output prices than in any##NewPara##period since  and  respectively. But these pressures had not fed through into consumer prices yet. Partly this might have reflected a squeeze on distributors  margins, but it was not clear whether this would persist or go further or whether it might to some extent prove to have been a cyclical phenomenon that would reverse.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##There had been quite a lot of news on the month. The picture of a broadly based world recovery and a robust UK GDP growth outlook drawn in the August Inflation Report remained intact. But it seemed that the pace of UK growth in Q might be a little slower than had been envisaged, although it was too soon to judge with any certainty at this stage. The recent labour market data had also been surprisingly weak, though inflationary pressures were still evident in the supply chain. Some downside risks had perhaps increased. First, future US economic growth might be weaker if consumption growth picked up less briskly from the second quarter. Second, the further signs that the UK housing market was cooling might mean a greater risk of a more abrupt correction to house price inflation and the Committee may have underestimated the potential for an associated downward impact on consumption. Sterling had depreciated over the month. If that persisted, it would be likely to add to inflationary pressures, which would tend to offset the slightly weaker news about economic activity.##NewPara##The Committee considered the arguments for keeping the repo rate unchanged at .%, to which different members gave different weights.  The August Inflation Report central projection, based on the market yield curve, had been for CPI inflation to remain below the target for the immediate future, picking up steadily to meet the target around the two-year point. The  basis points increase in the repo rate in August reflected a movement at least as fast as tha t implied by the market rate curve on which the August projections had been based and the news about economic activity was, on balance, slightly weaker on the month. Medium-term inflation expectations appeared to remain well anchored to the target. So there was no case for a further rise in rates at this meeting.##NewPara##Some members also considered arguments for raising the repo rate by  basis points. The economy was, most probably, set to continue to grow at or above trend, and so to put gathering pressures on supply with little or no remaining spare capacity. Inflationary pressures would have been increased by a lower exchange rate and a shift down in the money market yield curve. If the lower level of market yields persisted, this might rekindle unwelcome strength in the household sector. Taken as a whole, the Committee did not find these arguments sufficient to justify a rise in the repo rate.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.