The world economy##NewPara##US growth at the end of last year had not been as weak as had been expected previously; since the February Inflation Report, the estimated quarterly growth rate of US GDP in  Q had been revised up from .% to .%. The estimated growth rates of consumption, investment, and government spending had all been revised upwards, and the estimated contribution of inventories to growth was also higher; but there was some offset from the revisions to net trade, with imports higher than previously thought and exports lower. In January , industrial production had increased by .%, with strong contributions from the auto industry and the information, communications and technology sector, and non-farm payrolls had increased by ,, almost reversing the fall in December; the trend in employment seemed to be flat. More recently, the ISM indices for manufacturing and non-manufacturing activity fell in February, but   at . and . respectively   indicated some continuing growth. The most recent Consensus forecast for US GDP growth in  was .%, in line with Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##A key question for the outlook for domestic demand in the United States was whether consumer demand there would slacken. Retail sales volumes had fallen by around % on the month in January, but that followed a sharp increase in December, which had been temporarily boosted by auto sales. The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimate of monthly consumption had followed a similar path. The monthly pattern of auto sales had been volatile, reflecting consumer finance incentives. Excluding this component, consumer spending had been reasonably robust. There was still scope for some households to reduce their interest payments by refinancing mortgages at lower rates, and further mortgage equity withdrawal might also help to sustain consumption growth. However, there had been sharp falls in consumer confidence, with the Michigan measure dropping from . in January to##NewPara##. in February, and the Conference Board measure dropping from . to    the lowest level since October  and, apart from immediately after the terrorist attacks on  September , the largest monthly fall since the Iran hostages crisis in April . The decline in the Conference Board measure was broadly based across its components. It was likely that prospect of a war with Iraq was having a dampening effect on confidence, but it was not yet clear what the consequences would be for consumer spending. Early indications from both the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi/UBS Warburg chain- store sales index and the Lynch, Jones and Ryan Redbook measure for department stores suggested that non-auto retail sales might have weakened in February.##NewPara##Recent news had done little to affect the outlook for the euro area discussed in the February Inflation Report.  German GDP had been flat in  Q, and domestic demand had remained sluggish, although investment had been a little stronger than expected, partly because of post-floods reconstruction activity. The German current account surplus, combined with the significant fiscal deficit, implied that the private sector was a very substantial net saver; eventually, the accumulation of wealth that that implied was likely to stimulate demand but, as the experience of Japan demonstrated, that might take a long time. The Purchasing Managers Index for business activity in services had dipped a little in February, although the index for manufacturing recovered slightly. The IFO index of business confidence had risen in February, which was perhaps encouraging. French GDP growth had been a little firmer than German growth. The Purchasing Managers Indices also suggested that the immediate outlook was more buoyant in France than Germany. In the euro area as a whole, industrial production had fallen by .% in December, more than reversing the increase in November, but still consistent with a marginal increment to euro-area GDP in  Q. Survey measures of business activity in February appeared to have fallen somewhat in services and increased in manufacturing.##NewPara##The flash estimate of consumer price inflation in February was .%, slightly up on the month, and above the zone regarded by the ECB as consistent with price stability, but that in part reflected temporary factors. There was a widespread expectation in the market that the ECB would agree a reduction in its policy rate at its meeting on  March. Overall, euro-area activity appeared to be consistent with Consensus forecasts of just over % growth for  as a whole   and there was still little sign of a domestic engine of expansion.##NewPara##In Japan, the preliminary estimate of GDP growth in  Q had, at .%, been surprisingly high, and had been accompanied by upward revisions to past data. On the face of it, this was encouraging, but the figures contrasted with the % decline in the METI  all-activity  index in the##NewPara##same quarter, and might suggest inaccuracies in the GDP deflators. Growth in non-Japan Asia remained relatively robust.##NewPara##There were some puzzles in world trade data. Several major economies reported a slowdown in their export growth in Q, yet their imports if anything had been stronger than expected. It was uncertain whether this reflected statistical discrepancies or increased market penetration by other countries  exporters. Subject to this caveat, large US current account deficits appeared to be persisting, as were Japanese and euro-area surpluses, but it was not clear that this pattern was sustainable indefinitely.##NewTopic##Money, credit and financial market prices##NewPara##This month, unlike last, there had been only a small fall in UK equity market indices. In contrast, there had been some significant movements in interest rates and exchange rates.##NewPara##Short-term sterling market interest rates had fallen, in both nominal and real terms. One of the main triggers had been the Committee s reduction in the repo rate in February, which had been followed very quickly by a fall in yields along the curve: over  basis points for June  contracts and around  basis points for June  contracts. If financial market participants had regarded the Committee s decision as simply bringing forward the interest rate reduction that they had been expecting to see within a few months anyway, it might have been expected that the yield curve would only have been affected at the very short end. This was not what had happened.##NewPara##The Inflation Report, MPC minutes and recent testimony to the Treasury Select Committee (TSC) should have corrected any mistaken view that the Committee s move had been precipitated by bad news about the economic outlook not yet available more widely. So why had yields fallen so sharply and remained low? One possibility was that the repo rate reduction had changed perceptions of existing data and provided an insight into the Committee s analysis of those data. A second possibility was that market observers had re-evaluated the Committee s responses to changes in output and inflation   its  reaction function . They might have concluded that the Committee was more concerned than they had thought about sustaining output growth and less with the risks to achieving the inflation target; or that the Committee was more willing than they had expected to reduce interest rates despite above-target inflation and rapid house price increases. In contrast to short rates, longer-##NewPara##term forward rates had actually risen, and implied market expectations of inflation at all maturities appeared to have gone up, consistent with the second possibility. But they had in fact returned to around  % at medium-term horizons from levels a little below, so it did not seem that the credibility of the inflation target was in doubt. Indeed, the rate reduction may have reminded market participants that the Committee treats deviations of inflation above and below the target symmetrically.##NewPara##More recently, there had been further falls in the yield curve one to two years out, so that the   June  short sterling futures contract, for example, was now over  basis points lower than it had been a month earlier. But these later falls had taken place at the same time as declines in US and euro- area yield curves, suggesting that there had also been a general downgrading of expectations of global growth prospects and inflationary pressures over the next year or two.##NewPara##The other main financial markets news was the fall in sterling of % over the month, on the effective measure. Sterling had fallen against all major currencies, suggesting that it had been affected by UK-specific factors. Cumulatively, about one percentage point of the fall came in the immediate aftermath of the Committee s February decision, of the publication of the Inflation Report and the MPC minutes, and of the TSC testimony. Three hypotheses, not mutually exclusive, could be put forward for the decline. First, market participants might have revised their views about likely future UK interest rates relative to those in other countries, perhaps because the February rate reduction had altered perceptions of the Committee s reaction function. But relative changes in yield curves and the lack of any material increase in the volatility of interest rates implied by options prices suggested that this could be only a small part of the explanation. Second, there might have been a downward revision to the real exchange rate expected in the medium term, if market participants thought that there had been an adverse shock to UK domestic demand (relative to other countries). The Committee s reduction in rates might have contributed to a reassessment of the outlook, at a time when a considerable amount of new information about the economy was emerging. In those circumstances, markets could anticipate a further reduction in interest rates to offset the demand shock. The fall in the exchange rate and an increase in net trade would form a natural part of such rebalancing. Third, there might have been a loss of confidence due to the prospect of war in Iraq. That might have been expected to affect the dollar in the same way, and yet the dollar had not fallen as sharply over the past month. One possibility was that the value of the dollar already reflected this concern and that sterling had weakened because perceptions of the United Kingdom s position had become more closely identified with the United States. If so, a successful resolution of the international situation might##NewPara##reverse the fall in sterling quickly. These hypotheses were difficult to disentangle. It was possible, for example, that market participants initially thought that the Committee was reacting to new information in a different way, but had then come to agree that the outlook for demand was weaker than previously thought. A combination of these factors might be causing a reduction in the desired relative holdings of sterling assets in the portfolios of international investors.##NewPara##Broad money growth fell back in January to an annual rate of .% (compared with .% a month earlier). The annual growth rate of notes and coin   a potential indicator of retail spending activity   had recovered somewhat in February, to .%, but was still below the growth rates seen over most of the past four years. The twelve-month growth rate of M lending (excluding the effects of securitisations) had fallen a little in January. But annual growth of total net lending to individuals rose slightly to .%; within this measure, the annual growth rate of secured lending had picked up, more than offsetting a fall in the annual rate of unsecured lending. Outside manufacturing, borrowing by firms was also robust;  overall, the twelve-month growth rate of private non-financial corporations  M borrowing (excluding securitisations) had increased to .% in January.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##GDP at market prices had grown by .% in  Q, according to the latest ONS data; measured at basic prices, growth had been slightly weaker.  On the output side, estimated service sector output growth in Q was revised down to .%, compared with the preliminary estimate of .%. Manufacturing output declined by .% on the quarter, following strong growth in Q, which in turn had probably reflected unwinding of the impact of the Jubilee in  Q. Manufacturing output had been a little weaker than envisaged at the time of the February Inflation Report, but estimated construction output growth in Q had been revised up sharply in the very latest data revision. The signs were that service sector output growth had been slowing in  Q, and that the trend in manufacturing output was flat or declining slightly. The CIPS business activity index for services fell back from . in January to . in February, while the CIPS manufacturing output index was unchanged at ., with a slight pick-up in the new orders balance. Reports from the Bank s regional Agents confirmed this picture, and it looked as if, overall, output growth would be a little lower in Q than expected a month ago.##NewPara##On the expenditure side, investment in  Q had been weaker than expected, with manufacturing investment particularly weak   % lower than a year earlier. But public sector consumption growth had been higher than expected, and the negative contribution from net trade smaller, because imports had been unexpectedly low. Exports had fallen about  % on the quarter according to current data, but it seemed likely from other evidence that the estimate would be revised upwards over time. The Bank s regional Agents  recent special survey had suggested that export performance if anything had been a little stronger in Q than Q, because of a pick-up in exports to outside the EU. Consumption growth, at .% on the quarter, was much as expected. But current indicators for  Q suggested that consumption might be slowing sooner than projected in the February Inflation Report. Retail sales had fallen by % in January, bringing them back to the same level as in October, although uncertainty about the appropriate adjustments for the seasonal pattern of retail spending made it difficult to be confident about changes in the underlying trend. According to the Bank s Agents, retailers expected sales to slow, and the CBI s Distributive Trades survey balance for the volume of sales fell back in February (although the balance for sales expected in March was up, and the CIPS manufacturing survey indicated that orders for and output of consumer goods were buoyant). Consumer confidence had dropped sharply: the GfK survey balance (after adjusting for seasonal variation) fell in February to the lowest level since . The deterioration in respondents  views about the general economic outlook was the main factor, but questions about respondents  own circumstances had also elicited a more pessimistic response. Households might also have been anticipating the likely impact of higher National Insurance contributions on disposable income from  Q onwards.##NewPara##The outlook for consumers  expenditure was also likely to be affected by the housing market, which appeared to be cooling. According to both the Halifax and Nationwide price indices, the three- month-on-three-month rate of increase of house prices had dropped under %, well below the peaks last year of around %. The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors survey also suggested that house price increases had moderated and were likely to continue to do so. Indicators of housing market activity were also consistent with weakening. However, household mortgage borrowing was still strong: the annual growth rate of total net lending to individuals secured on property rose in January, and it was likely that mortgage equity withdrawal had continued to increase in  Q.   The change   in the composition of household borrowing from unsecured to secured was likely to reduce the burden of debt servicing on the household sector and increase its resilience somewhat in the face of any future##NewPara##adverse shocks to income, other things being equal. Moreover, fixed-rate mortgage rates might yet have further to fall, given the recent falls in swap rates.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Employment had increased sharply in  Q, by ,, comprising mainly men and mainly full-time employees, and the unemployment rate fell . percentage points to .%. But total hours worked remained broadly flat, as they had for some time: average hours worked per employed person dropped nearly % over the year to  Q. Such falls seemed likely to be the result in part of structural factors, such as the EU Working Time Directive and shifts in labour demand away from sectors that traditionally offered jobs with long hours, rather than cyclical factors, and were therefore unlikely to be reversed. The CIPS employment surveys so far this year were consistent with continuing job losses in manufacturing and some weakening in the rest of the private sector in  Q. But these surveys did not cover the public sector, where employment was increasing, so their implications for overall employment growth were unclear.##NewPara##The headline annual rate of increase in private sector earnings fell to .% in December and regular pay   that is, excluding bonuses   increased at an annual rate of .%, unchanged on the month. The corresponding rates for the public sector were higher, at .% and .% respectively. The average private sector pay settlement in the twelve months to January was .%, unchanged on the month, and information on settlements in January itself suggested that they were running at around half a percentage point lower than a year earlier. It was reassuring that settlements had so far not picked up: the forthcoming increases in National Insurance contributions and the higher RPI inflation than a year earlier had raised the possibility that they might increase. It appeared that competitive pressures on employers were such that, despite the tightness of the labour market, they were keeping their labour costs under control.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##A number of developments were likely to raise the retail price level in the near future and hence, temporarily, the rate of inflation. Some had been considered in past Committee forecasts. First, the rise in National Insurance contributions from the beginning of the next tax year was likely to do so. Second, the component of the Retail Prices Index capturing the cost of housing depreciation would##NewPara##continue to rise rapidly for a while, reflecting recent large annual increases in house prices, although the impact would diminish as house prices slowed.  There were now some additional factors that would raise inflation in the short run relative to the February projection. First, sterling oil prices had increased by % since the February MPC meeting, sufficient to add about . percentage points to the annual inflation rate during this year, with little effect from twelve months hence. This had been accompanied by somewhat higher expected future sterling oil prices.  Second, Council Tax increases in April appeared likely to average about % to %, somewhat higher than anticipated by the Committee at the time of the February Inflation Report. This revision would add around a further##NewPara##percentage points to the projected inflation rate for twelve months from their implementation. Third, the recent depreciation of the exchange rate would tend to result in higher import prices.  But the extent of pass-through of exchange rates to, first, the prices at which goods are imported and, second, to goods prices in the shops was highly uncertain. It would depend on the extent to which the depreciation was expected to be permanent and what level of sales importing firms thought that they would lose to competing domestic producers if they raised sterling prices. The total impact of the depreciation on the retail price level would depend on what had caused it in the first place. If the trigger had been an adverse shock to domestic demand, the stimulus it would give to net exports would tend to cancel out the deflationary impact of that shock; otherwise, there might be second-round effects on inflation due to an increase in aggregate demand.##NewPara##The net effect of these developments was likely to raise RPIX inflation in the short run, and it   was now likely to exceed % in the coming months. Whether inflation around the two-year forecast horizon would be affected would depend on whether the exchange rate depreciation persisted or, indeed, went further; on the degree and speed of pass-through into retail prices; and on whether temporary rises in inflation led to higher medium-term inflation expectations amongst wage bargainers and price setters. There were some signs that expectations of inflation  to  months ahead might have risen a little.  There had also been a small increase in forward inflation rates implied by yields in  the gilts market, although they did not materially exceed the .% target at any maturity.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The Reuters poll reported that economists had attached a mean probability of about % to there being no change in the repo rate this month, and about % to a decrease of  basis points; none##NewPara##thought that the most likely outcome was a reduction. Forecasts for the repo rate at the end of  and  were some  to  basis points lower than they had been last month.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Committee members agreed that the world outlook remained broadly similar to that described in the February Inflation Report;  the medium-term prospect was for a slow recovery.  The possibility of a war in Iraq increased uncertainty in the short run and seemed to be having a widespread impact on consumer and business confidence, but it was not clear yet what effect that would have on global activity or prices. In the United Kingdom, evidence was accumulating that household consumption was beginning to slow and the housing market continuing to cool. Combined with the depreciation of sterling over the past month, this held out the encouraging possibility of a rebalancing of demand and activity within the UK economy, and   so far, at least   without the sharp adjustment that had often accompanied retrenchment by consumers in the past. Nevertheless, the immediate prospect was for UK growth to be a little below trend and inflation to be above target. RPIX inflation was now likely to be higher in the short run than projected in February, because of the exchange rate depreciation, oil prices and the Council Tax increases.##NewPara##In the light of this conjuncture, the Committee considered arguments for raising, reducing and maintaining the repo rate. The case for raising rates was that the extra impetus to RPIX inflation in the short run could push inflation expectations above the target, and might lead to upward pressure on pay which could in turn feed through to prices. Furthermore, sterling s recent depreciation might have a significant impact on the price level and net export demand, were it to persist. The size of that impact would depend on the degree of pass-through to retail prices.##NewPara##A case could also be made for a reduction in interest rates. First, demand prospects were weaker than expected. There were some signs that output in the first quarter of  was likely to be lower than the Committee had projected; investment remained weak; consumption might be slowing more sharply than envisaged in the February Inflation Report;  households might save more in order to reduce their historically high debt burdens; and the substantial fall in recorded exports in  Q might turn out to reflect actual export performance to a greater extent than had been assumed. Second, the recent falls in business and consumer confidence in many countries might not be as closely linked to the prospect of war in Iraq as many assumed, and might therefore persist even after resolution of##NewPara##war-related uncertainties. Third, most of the factors that were driving inflation higher in the near term could be expected either to reverse or to have only a one-off effect on the price level, and so did not necessarily imply higher inflation further out, provided that feed-through to inflation expectations and wages was limited. The increase in National Insurance contributions and the rise in oil prices, whilst raising measured inflation in the short run, would tend to have a deflationary impact on demand. The exchange rate depreciation, to the extent that it raised retail prices, would tend to lower consumers  real income in the short term   though favourable effects on demand would come through as net trade improved. Experience from the United Kingdom in the past and from some other countries suggested that the pass-through to retail prices might, in any case, be small. Fourth, pay pressures remained muted despite the pre-announced increases in National Insurance contributions. For one member of the Committee, these arguments suggested that inflation was likely to fall below  % in the medium term, and that a further reduction in the repo rate was necessary to achieve the inflation target.##NewPara##However, for most members of the Committee, the arguments for maintaining the repo rate at its current level were, on balance, persuasive. First, the evidence of the past month was not sufficient by itself to change significantly the outlook for inflation around the two-year horizon from the one laid out in February.  The higher short-term inflation outlook and the fall in the exchange rate had increased the upside risks to inflation from possible rises in inflation expectations. However, evidence from the bond markets and surveys did not suggest that inflation expectations had come adrift from the  % target, and pay settlements were not rising. The exchange rate depreciation might not persist, particularly if it was related to some extent to fears about war in Iraq. If those fears were quickly  allayed, sterling could strengthen again. News about output and demand suggested to some members that prospects were weaker than had been expected and that the upside risks had diminished, but the falls in the exchange rate and market interest rates would, if sustained, provide a stimulus to activity. Second, the case for an increase in the repo rate was not convincing. It was appropriate to look through temporary effects on inflation to the extent that they did not raise inflation expectations in the medium term. It was too soon to judge whether the implications for inflation of the exchange rate depreciation were as substantial as a mechanical adjustment to the February projections might suggest, and further analysis of its possible consequences was required. The degrees of pass-through from the exchange rate to the prices at which goods are imported, and even more from those prices to retail prices, were very uncertain, and depended on, amongst other things, the extent to which firms themselves believed the depreciation would persist. For some members, the Committee s February central projection for inflation had been a little too high, so that there was in their view scope to##NewPara##accommodate some small increase in inflationary pressure. For some other members, the arguments for a repo rate of .% as opposed to % were more finely balanced, but a decision to increase the repo rate so soon after the reduction last month would, in current circumstances, risk having a greater- than-warranted effect on market interest rates. Third, nor were the arguments for a reduction convincing for most members. It was very important that inflation expectations should remain anchored to the  % target. A further reduction in rates so soon, at a time when RPIX inflation was likely temporarily to rise further above the target, might dislodge that anchor. In the view of some members, the slowdown in consumption growth was still tentative, and it was not clear that the fall was faster than already envisaged in the Committee s central projection. Lending to the household sector was still very buoyant. The recent declines in consumer confidence might reflect uncertainties about the international political situation, which might be resolved in the near term. Fourth, the outlook for UK demand might be affected by the Budget next month; it would be sensible to wait for any new information it might contain about the fiscal stance.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. Eight members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, Andrew Large,##NewPara##Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Marian Bell, Stephen Nickell and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. Christopher Allsopp voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.