The world economy##NewPara##Activity in the United States economy had again been stronger than expected over the past month.  Indeed, provisional estimates suggested it had contributed around half of the increase in world demand in , well in excess of its % share of world output. The National Association of Purchasing Managers (NAPM) index had strengthened   partly reflecting an improvement in export orders. This was surprising given recent weakness in the world economy and the strength of the US dollar. There were, perhaps, some parallels with the UK survey data. However, the prospects for the US economy as a whole still seemed to be for slowing growth over coming quarters. On balance, prospects for growth in the euro area had weakened over the month, but with considerable inter-regional variation. The weak Q output data in Germany and Italy had more than counterbalanced some stronger than expected French data. In Japan, there were now signs that financial restructuring was taking place but, in the short run, this might exacerbate the weakness in credit conditions. The immediate prospects for activity there did not seem to have changed much over the past month. Overall, there seemed to be little change in the prospects for UK export demand from developments in other major industrial economies.##NewPara##The situation outside the OECD had not changed much over the past month. There had been renewed difficulties in Brazil, and the real had weakened. There was still a risk of contagion, but other major countries in South America were not obviously under pressure. The lower oil price had already led to lower imports by the oil exporting countries and this could be seen in UK exports, but otherwise developments over the month were much as expected overall.##NewTopic##Money and financial markets##NewPara##Narrow money growth continued to be quite strong, and was possibly being influenced by the past reductions in interest rates. Broad money growth was continuing to ease, and it was noticeable that the shorter three and six-month annualised growth rates were below the##NewPara##twelve-month growth rate. The risks from past rapid growth in broad money had diminished.##NewPara##The sterling effective exchange rate was currently over % higher than the  day average used as the starting-point for the February Inflation Report projections. The FT-SE All-Share index had risen by % since the February Report. The rise in share prices was broadly based, with both the FT-SE  and Small Capitalisation indexes rising over the period. This was in contrast with earlier periods when the FT-SE  had grown faster than the Small Capitalisation index.##NewPara##The rise in the sterling effective exchange rate reflected the balance of two offsetting bilateral movements; sterling had depreciated against the US dollar but had appreciated against the euro. The implications for UK inflation would depend on the reasons for the changes. Political and economic developments in the euro area probably accounted for some of the depreciation of the euro against the dollar and sterling over the past month. It was possible that the weakening euro reflected the market s expectation that prospects for euro-area demand and output growth were weaker than for the United States, and perhaps for the United Kingdom as well given the possibility of faster growth here in late  and . There was evidence that the movement in interest rate differentials could account for some of the rise in sterling.##NewPara##The rise in the exchange rate and in equity prices would have opposite effects on the central projection for inflation, but the movement in the exchange rate was thought to be the more significant of the two. To the extent that sterling s strength persisted it would increase the imbalance between the traded and non-traded sectors of the economy, and would require a strengthening of domestic demand if inflation were not to fall below target.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The level of GDP in  Q had been revised down by  % since the preliminary output estimate available at the time of the February Inflation Report. The expenditure composition had also been published, and this showed slightly weaker final domestic demand than assumed in the central projection. The rise in inventories had also been stronger than expected, leaving domestic demand growth a little stronger overall. But faster domestic demand growth had been offset by a larger negative contribution from net trade (primarily weaker exports), and so GDP##NewPara##growth in the fourth quarter was, at .%, unchanged from the time of the February Report. The statistical discrepancy between the expenditure and average measure of GDP was .% in  Q. But due to the suspension of the Average Earnings Index there was no income measure of GDP available for Q. Within the output breakdown, the fall in construction output for the third successive quarter seemed surprising given recent orders and survey data.##NewPara##Consumption growth had been revised down in  Q, but the level in Q was not materially different from that expected at the time of the Report. Hence, the puzzle as to why consumption growth had weakened so much through - remained. Retail sales (around % of consumption) had recovered in January, but the underlying picture remained fairly weak. Consumer confidence in January had risen for the third successive month on the GfK measure. It was likely that the five reductions in interest rates since the autumn had played a material role in stabilising confidence, but it was difficult to be sure how robust the recent recovery was. More work was needed to understand how consumer confidence was affected by changes in interest rates. There were also some signs of a pick-up in the housing market, particularly in the indicators which are at the start of the house buying process, such as House Builders Federation site visits and reservations. There seemed little news in the latest house price figures.##NewPara##The build-up in inventories appeared a little puzzling as it was not apparent in either the official manufacturing or retail distribution figures, where any signs of weaker than expected demand might be expected. The rise in stocks in the fourth quarter - and for  as a whole - had been concentrated in the  other industries  sector, which included the quarterly alignment adjustment (between the expenditure and output measures of GDP). It was possible that this rise in stocks could partly reflect a change in the pattern of car registrations this year, which would not as yet be accounted for in the usual seasonal adjustment.##NewPara##The news in the national accounts and recent surveys could be interpreted in several ways. First, the lower level of GDP than in previous estimates, coupled with the build up of inventories, might point to a weaker picture for demand than previously thought. In particular, the weaker outturn for exports in Q, and the sharp fall in the volatile non-EU exports figure in January, might point to some of the downside risks to external demand coming through. But the changes in the composition and revisions to the level of GDP were not particularly large.##NewPara##Second, the lower level of GDP, coupled with the latest survey data, raised the question of whether the low point in output growth might have come a little earlier than previously expected.##NewPara##Third, the surveys, though generally remaining weak, had all been stronger over the past month. That uniformity was somewhat surprising, and might indicate a slightly better picture than previously thought. Some of the survey indicators were recovering towards levels recorded last summer, before the sharp deterioration occurred. Of particular note had been the improvement in export orders in both the CBI and CIPS surveys over the past month. So to the extent that the surveys had for a while been painting a weaker picture for exports than the ONS data, that gap now appeared to be closing.##NewPara##Overall, the data did not significantly change the picture for demand and output. The improvement in survey data might prove significant, but had yet to be seen in the official data.##NewTopic##The forthcoming Budget##NewPara##Prior to the meeting, the Committee was briefed by Treasury officials about the forthcoming Budget s expenditure and revenue projections and macroeconomic forecasts, but not the detailed measures. The overall fiscal position was reported to remain stable, and was in line with the assumptions in the February Inflation Report.##NewPara##At the MPC meeting, the Committee briefly discussed the lower than planned Net Departmental Outlays seen in the first ten months of the / fiscal year. This was primarily related to social security rather than other government departments  spending on goods and services. But since the control framework was new this year, it was not known what would happen to spending at the end of the year: departments had less of an incentive to spend their budgets in the final weeks of the fiscal year as they could carry spending forward to future years, which could have timing consequences for the pattern of real demand.##NewTopic##Labour market##NewPara##The Committee had been briefed by Mr King and by Bank staff before the meeting on the review of the Average Earnings Index, which was published on  March. Earnings growth was now estimated to have reached a peak of .% in May , before falling back to .% in November on the headline measure. Preliminary estimates of unit wage costs produced by Bank staff using the revised Average Earnings Index suggested a stronger picture for the first half of  than previously thought, and a weaker picture in the second half of the year with the rate of change flat at around  %.##NewPara##The general pattern of earnings growth through  was broadly consistent with the assumptions that had been made at the time of the February Inflation Report. That gave the##NewPara##Committee members somewhat greater confidence in the starting assumptions for earnings growth than they had felt at the time of the Report. However, the pace of slowdown in earnings growth was more marked than had been assumed: starting from a higher level and ending a little below the February assumption. The level of earnings at the end of  was close to that assumed in the projections. A preliminary analysis suggested that after making a rough adjustment for hours worked, the profile of the growth of earnings per hour through the second half of the year was broadly flat. Hence the rise and fall in the headline measure through  was, perhaps, consistent with a higher, then lower, contribution from overtime. More analysis of the new figures was needed, for example of the contribution of bonuses to earnings growth. The fall in earnings growth through  would need to be reconciled with the rise in employment and fall in unemployment over this period. One possible explanation was the fall in inflation expectations discussed at previous meetings. Among the recommendations made in the review of the AEI were a number of further improvements to the way the series was compiled to bring it up to best practice. Hence the Committee concluded that it should not, as yet, place great weight on the index.##NewPara##The Bank s settlements series showed some signs that the peak might have been passed on the twelve-month employment weighted mean measure. The Reward index had declined on a broadly similar path to the revised Average Earnings Index over .##NewPara##The Committee noted that its central projection for earnings growth remained towards the top end of the range of other forecasts, despite a broadly similar projection for inflation in these forecasts. The Committee had discussed this during the February Inflation Report round in the context of recent movements in productivity. It would be necessary to look at the reasons for the differences in projections of real earnings growth, and hence implied profit margins, in the light of the new earnings data.##NewPara##The latest data continued to show rising employment and falling unemployment, though total hours worked had fallen in December. The rise in employment was partly accounted for by an increase in the number of women in part-time employment. Both the stock of vacancies and number of new vacancies seemed surprisingly high and seemed to bear out the picture in the employment and unemployment data, suggesting a still tight labour market. But the latest Federation of Recruitment and Employment Services (FRES) survey showed that the job market index was at its lowest level since . The three CIPS surveys for manufacturing, construction and services all pointed to falling employment. It seemed likely that a turning point would soon be seen in the official data.##NewTopic##Prices##NewPara##Non-oil commodity prices had risen in January in sterling terms. There were tentative signs that the deflation might be coming to an end. The level of commodity prices was still much lower than a year ago, but they would have to keep falling to lower the central projection for inflation compared with February.##NewPara##Contacts of the Bank s regional Agents were increasingly mentioning that consumers were more  price sensitive  than previously. The Committee discussed possible explanations for this. The comment might simply reflect inflation illusion. Lower inflation over recent years may have made it easier for people to distinguish movements in relative prices from general price inflation. It seemed likely that the comments also reflected continuing structural changes in the retail industry, for example through a greater use of discount stores, which might be lowering margins.##NewPara##The Committee also noted the rise in inflation expectations at longer maturities over the past month, as measured by the difference between implied forward interest rates on nominal and index linked bonds. It was too early to place much weight on this movement, which was in any event small by historical standards. There had not been much movement in shorter-term survey-based measures of inflation expectations over the past month.##NewPara##Inflation had turned out a little higher than expected in January, but this reflected movement in the highly volatile seasonal food component. It was possible that better weather in February would lower some seasonal food prices. This had no implications for inflation two years or so ahead. The Committee noted that the timing of the Budget would mean that annual changes in fuel duties   from the previously announced  escalator    would be included in the March RPI figure this year, rather than in April as had been the case in . This would mean a temporary rise in RPIX inflation in March, all other things being equal. The Committee noted that inflation outturns had been at, or above,  % since the introduction of the new policy framework in . These outturns were more surprising given the mainly dampening shocks to world demand and prices. It would be important to consider whether there were any lessons from this.##NewPara##The GDP deflator had risen .% in the year to  Q, and was the highest for some time. However, the increase in the annual rate partly reflected a low figure in  Q dropping out of the comparison, as well as some terms of trade effects. The rise in the household expenditure deflator was still below % in the year to Q.##NewTopic##Other considerations bearing on the decision this month##NewPara##Before turning to the immediate policy decision, the Committee discussed a number of other considerations. First, should the Committee seek to offset the projected weak GDP growth in the first half of ? Even if demand and output were turning out weaker than expected, the lags in the operation of monetary policy had previously been assumed to be such that only a limited effect on activity would be possible. However it was possible that there were signs, for example in the confidence surveys, of a more rapid response to changes in interest rates than had been the case in the past. One possible explanation was that the new monetary policy regime provided greater confidence in the commitment to the inflation target which was consistent with the fall in inflation expectations, and might help to explain the moderation of earnings growth since mid .##NewPara##Second, the exchange rate had risen, especially in recent days, to a level above that implied by the central projection in the February Inflation Report, despite the  basis point reduction in interest rates at the previous meeting. By itself this would tend to reduce import prices and retail prices, and might justify a reduction in interest rates. But it was too soon to judge whether the rise would persist, and what reaction there would be to a further reduction in rates. In any case, it would not be sensible for policy to react to high frequency movements in the exchange rate, as this could lead to a volatile path for interest rates from month to month, and might make it more difficult for others to understand the motives for interest rate changes.##NewPara##Third, the Committee considered whether there was any particular significance in changing interest rates so soon after an Inflation Report round. Some members felt that clear news was needed for rates to change so shortly after the last forecast; otherwise, it would appear to downgrade the value and role of the projections.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##There were four key developments over the month. First, the revised earnings data had been published. Second, the effective exchange rate had strengthened. Third, if anything, the GDP figures were weaker than expected, particularly if weight were placed on the rise in inventories and/or the sharper than expected fall in exports. Finally, there had been a uniform strengthening of survey measures, albeit from a low level. On balance, these four factors suggested slightly lower prospective inflation than thought at the time of the February Inflation Report.##NewPara##Some possible reasons for a further reduction in interest rates were identified. If, for example, it was expected that the rise in sterling would be maintained, there might be a case for a  basis point reduction in interest rates this month.  Second, maintaining rates at their current level this month might be interpreted as a signal that a floor in rates had been reached, which might stall - or even reverse - the recovery in business and consumer sentiment.##NewPara##One view was that the news on the month did not, as yet, amount to a sufficient case for a further reduction in interest rates. It would be better to see more evidence, in particular whether the strength in the surveys was maintained and whether it began to feed through to the official data. There would also be a benefit in undertaking more analysis of the revised earnings data. On this view, the repo rate should be maintained at .%. Among those members holding this view, some felt that it was now slightly more likely than a month ago that there would be a further reduction.##NewPara##The Committee discussed whether, even though there was not a compelling case for an immediate  basis point reduction in rates, there might be a case for a smaller reduction. There could be a case for moving in smaller steps than  basis points if the data warranted it. However, since the Committee had not previously made changes in anything other than multiples of  basis points, there would be a risk of providing a confusing signal to markets. Some members also thought it would imply a degree of fine-tuning beyond what was sensible.##NewPara##Another view was that interest rates should be close to or possibly below the  neutral  level at this point in the economic cycle. On that view, the reduction in rates of  basis points at the February meeting had brought the level of interest rates into its probable neutral range. The news over the past month reinforced the view that interest rates might need to be reduced further. But we had only started to see the effects of previous interest rate reductions, and nominal long and short-term interest rates were now close to their lowest level for many years. The reactions of firms and households   both savers and borrowers   to such historically unusual levels were difficult to predict with much confidence. Although the direction of interest rates was still more likely than not to be down, there was no urgency this month and it was best to observe how the economy reacted to the earlier interest rate reductions. On this view, therefore, the repo rate should be maintained at .%.##NewPara##Another view in February had been that a reduction in rates of - basis points was required. That view had been predicated on the assumption that first, the central projection in the Inflation Report was around . percentage points too high; and second, that it was possible to ease with a view to supporting activity in the near term without endangering achievement of the inflation target. This was especially true if the transmission mechanism was faster than##NewPara##had, on average, been the case in the past. The news on the month suggested that both activity and inflation might be a little lower than expected, and could justify a reduction in interest rates over and above what had been thought necessary a month ago. On this view, a reduction of##NewPara##- basis points was now required.##NewPara##The Governor invited members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be maintained at .%. Eight members of the Committee (the Governor,##NewPara##Mervyn King, David Clementi, Alan Budd, Charles Goodhart, DeAnne Julius, Ian Plenderleith and John Vickers) voted for the proposition. Willem Buiter voted against, preferring a reduction of .%.