The Budget##NewPara##The Committee had been briefed by Treasury officials prior to its meeting on the broad outline of the Chancellor s Budget, including the current fiscal position, the Treasury s economic forecast and the projected implications for government receipts and spending  which  showed  that  the expected path for public sector net borrowing was close to previous projections. By the time the Committee made its decision, all the details of the Budget had been announced. The main fiscal impact was from the over-indexation of the starting rate band for income tax, the measures supporting families with children and the additions to departmental spending. Alcohol duties had been frozen. Relative to the Pre-Budget Report (PBR) forecast, extra revenue was now expected in the current fiscal year and the Treasury expected this structural improvement to persist into future years, broadly offsetting the cost of new measures. So the fiscal stance in the current year had once again turned out to have been tighter than projected, but the outlook had not been materially changed in the light of this improvement. To that extent, the Budget differed little from what had already been built into the Committee s projections included in the February Inflation Report.##NewPara##In discussion at the Committee s meeting, it was suggested that the impact of the Budget measures on the composition of demand might nevertheless have some aggregate economic effects. The newly-announced measures would tend to redistribute income from higher to lower income families, which might have a higher propensity to consume out of their income. The more substantial PBR consultation measures, however, were largely petrol-related and so could tend to redistribute income in the opposite direction. At the same time, the supply-side measures might help to reduce the natural rate of unemployment.  So both demand and supply could increase as a result of the Budget, but the net effect was likely to be very modest.##NewPara##Some on the Committee questioned whether the convention of adopting the Treasury s nominal projections for government receipts and spending in the Inflation Report projections was appropriate, given that they were based on deliberately cautious assumptions. In particular, the strength of receipts, notably income tax, might be related to the current buoyancy of the economy and so could balance out over a full business cycle, but this should be reviewed in the context of the projections to be made for the May Inflation Report. There were also uncertainties as to the prospective rate of growth of real government spending. These included uncertainties relating to its composition and, for the given nominal profile, to the assumptions made about price deflators in the Committee s projections. These questions too would need to be reviewed in the context of the projections for the next Inflation Report.##NewTopic##Demand and Output##NewPara##Turning to the latest GDP data, output growth in the fourth quarter was unrevised at .%. Revisions to earlier quarters had changed the composition of expenditure somewhat. Consumption growth had been revised down by . percentage points for each of the first three quarters of last year and was .% in the fourth quarter. After these data revisions, consumption was weaker than expected at the time of the February Inflation Report. On the other hand, the average rate of growth of business investment during the year had been revised up substantially and had been .% in the fourth quarter.  Its level was  % higher in the fourth quarter than had been projected in the  February Inflation Report.##NewPara##The pace of consumption growth appeared to have been maintained into the current year, with consumer confidence relatively firm and the housing market regaining some momentum after its recent pause. Retail sales growth had rebounded to .% in January. It was likely that GDP growth would rebound somewhat in the first quarter, after a weak fourth quarter last year.##NewPara##Though most members regarded these data as indicating a somewhat more robust picture of domestic demand growth than had been expected, some felt that the downward revisions to consumption should be given more weight than the revisions to investment: all the quarterly revisions to consumption growth last year were downwards, and the fourth quarter outturn had been lower than expected. By contrast, the direction of the revisions to data on investment growth varied##NewPara##from quarter to quarter. Given the volatility of quarterly investment data, it was too soon to draw firm conclusions from the apparent recovery of investment growth in the fourth quarter. These members also noted that GDP growth in the fourth quarter remained a little lower than had been assumed as the starting point for the Committee s February projections, although the latest data on construction output suggested that GDP growth in the fourth quarter might be revised up slightly.##NewPara##The Committee also had available to it at its meeting the latest Index of Production data, which indicated a fall of .% in manufacturing output in January. This was matched by equivalent increases in other components which left the index overall unchanged on the month. A sharp fall in the output of the electrical and optical equipment sector, which had been growing strongly in recent months, more than accounted for the fall in manufacturing output. These movements could be erratic, although it was possible that they might reflect a more sustained weakening of the global technology sector.##NewTopic##Monetary and financial conditions##NewPara##The latest monetary data showed robust growth in the main aggregates. Notes and coin, after allowing for estimates of millennium distortions, had grown by about  % in February, the fastest rate of expansion since September . Though low inflation was likely to be part of the explanation for the faster growth of this aggregate, it was difficult to believe that this was the whole story and the figures were consistent with the buoyant data on retail sales. Broad money growth had increased to about  % in January, reversing signs the previous month of easing in the rate of growth. Total credit had grown rapidly, by .% in the year to January.##NewPara##There were differing interpretations of these data. Some members expected the projected slowdown in consumption growth to be associated with much weaker growth in credit aggregates, as households sought to reduce their indebtedness. There was still no sign that this rebalancing was yet in train, so the rapid growth of money and credit implied upside risks to the outlook for inflation. Others observed that holdings of notes and coin continued to rise relative to retail sales; and that, with nominal returns on savings so low and with the improved liquidity of savings instruments offered outside the M sector, substantial household asset reallocations and large swings in M##NewPara##aggregates could be expected without any material implications for the inflation outlook.##NewPara##Mortgage loan rates had been falling faster than the Bank s repo rate, most recently as a result of more intense competition between mortgage lenders. If savers were similarly facing lower rates, the average interest rate faced by households would already have fallen relative to the Bank s repo rate. This might simply represent anticipation of a further cut in the official rate. But if the spread between mortgage and saving rates had narrowed, this would - other things being equal - be reflected in lower profitability and the value of bank shares would fall, with implications for household wealth. So some members were unsure about the extent to which this represented an overall easing of monetary conditions for households, with consequent effects on aggregate demand.##NewPara##Short-term market interest rates had eased further over the month, in expectation of further cuts in the repo rate, and the market repo rate was some  basis points further below the Bank s repo rate than normal. The market expectation signalled by these rates was for cuts of  basis points over the next few months.##NewPara##A number of medium-rated corporate bond spreads had widened since the start of the year. This was in large part a reflection of the sharp rise in spreads on telecoms sector bonds. Some members noted that this could have significant implications for corporate investment. Higher-rated corporate credit spreads on the other hand had narrowed slightly on the month.##NewPara##Equity prices, both in the United Kingdom and internationally, had fallen sharply in February, reversing the rises in January. Some members thought that the widespread pattern of equity price falls indicated investor concern that weakness in the US economy would have a significant effect on other countries  growth prospects. By contrast, house prices seemed to be increasing again after a pause last year. The most recent price balance reported by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors was back up to the level seen in the second quarter of last year. The latest equity price falls could be offset in their effects on households  total wealth by the implied housing wealth gains, and some members felt it was unlikely that they would yet be sufficient to have made households more concerned about the balance between their debt and wealth. This could, by allowing households  current very low savings rate to persist, weaken their financial positions and so increase the risk of a sharp adjustment if consumer confidence were to fall. But the nominal costs of##NewPara##servicing debt were now relatively low and it was suggested by some that a given level of indebtedness might therefore be less worrying than in the past. On this argument, debt at current levels would be unlikely to constrain consumption or to prompt households to save more, unless employment prospects were to worsen.##NewTopic##The world economy##NewPara##Outside forecasts for world growth were still being lowered, especially for Japan and the United States. Economic data for the United States were mixed: the fourth quarter outturn was not as bad as had been feared, and early indications for the first quarter were similarly somewhat stronger with retail sales up .% in January. The purchasing managers  index had recovered slightly but remained very weak. Consumer confidence indicators had fallen sharply, with the expectations component of the Conference Board measure having fallen to its lowest level since October , though the current conditions index had fallen much less. Nor was the inflation outlook wholly comforting, with CPI inflation at over  % and the core rate at best stable. If worries about inflation prospects were to develop, the authorities could become more cautious about providing a further stimulus to the economy. But some pointed to the fact that inflation outturns were a lagging indicator and that various leading indicators of inflation (for example, capacity utilisation and commodity prices) suggested falling inflation in future.##NewPara##For some, the latest information made it seem more plausible that the slowdown in the United States would be prolonged rather than short-lived. Though backward-looking and current indicators of economic conditions had perhaps been stronger than expected, those with a more##NewPara##forward-looking content continued to weaken. Recent equity market falls had been driven by profit warnings, which were now no longer associated with predictions of early recovery. The general picture was of expectations for the first quarter being upgraded somewhat, but with those for the second quarter being revised down. The outlook for investment was weaker, and industrial sector capacity utilisation was at its lowest since August .##NewPara##Others noted that, while the trough might now be reached rather later than had previously been expected, that need not of itself imply that the slowdown would be any more protracted. It was important to differentiate between what was actually known (which was stronger than expected) and##NewPara##what remained speculative. Though equity market prices had fallen back in February, they had so far done no more than return to their levels at the turn of the year.##NewPara##Growth in Japan had been flat through last year and the Consensus forecast for the first quarter had been lowered. Growth in the euro area overall appeared to be stable, though somewhat lower than last year. There was recent evidence of weakness in Germany, with revised data suggesting slowing in the second half of last year and private domestic demand sharply lower, but the French economy was more robust. It was encouraging that there had been few signs of contagion from the severe economic problems faced by Turkey and Argentina.##NewPara##In terms of the effects of these world developments on the United Kingdom, the evidence so far was consistent with the projection in the February Inflation Report. Business and consumer confidence remained strong, and exports to the United States in January had reversed the sharp fall recorded in the previous month s data. The Bank s regional Agents had reported some falls in orders from the United States, but these were balanced by gains elsewhere. They had also reported that some investment projects were being deferred. Admittedly, none of the forward-looking UK surveys asked questions directly related to the United States, although overall export optimism had fallen in a number of surveys, and so it was perhaps too soon to expect to see evidence of the effects of a US-related slowdown here. Moreover, recent falls in mortgage interest rates could be supporting consumer confidence while the decline in sterling against the euro from its peaks of last year might be supporting business confidence - so masking any effect from the US slowdown. But it nonetheless remained true that the evidence of a significant impact on the United Kingdom was so far slight.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Labour market data remained hard to interpret. The sharp fall in employment as measured by the Labour Force Survey (LFS) was less pronounced in the latest release, covering the fourth quarter, than it had been in the three months to November. Permanent employment continued to grow and the recent offsetting falls in temporary employment could be erratic. These LFS data were not matched by similar falls in survey-based measures of employment such as those compiled for the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply, which continued to show overall employment##NewPara##growth. But the LFS data remained stronger than the available quarterly figures on Workforce Jobs. Data on unemployment showed a more consistent picture, with both LFS and claimant count measures falling. The most striking data were those for inactivity, which had risen sharply in recent months. This increase was concentrated among those who said that they did not want a job. The Bank s regional Agents reported some early indications of the labour market becoming less tight, but the data on quantities showed little sign yet of any significant loosening.##NewPara##The latest data on the Average Earnings Index confirmed the upward trend in earnings growth which had developed during the second half of last year, and were somewhat stronger than expected. Earnings growth in private services had been above % throughout the fourth quarter and regular pay growth in the private sector had been rising steadily, from .% in July to .% in December. Information so far available on pay settlements in January was, however, less worrying and in line with expectations given the higher level of RPI inflation that month than a year earlier. The slowing pace of RPI inflation over the coming months should be a helpful moderating influence on settlements in April, the busiest settlement month of the year.##NewPara##The Government had announced that the adult rate for the National Minimum Wage was to be increased to  . in October. Initial staff estimates suggested that this could add . percentage points to the level of earnings and about . percentage points to price inflation. If differentials restoration were to be more extensive than assumed, it could increase these effects. But when the Minimum Wage was introduced in October , the number of workers directly affected had turned out smaller than expected. Some sectors of the economy faced intense competitive pressure, which could further reduce pass-through from wages to prices. And some firms might already have adjusted wages in anticipation of an increase.  Taking all these factors together, it did not seem likely that the effects on inflation from uprating to this level would be large, although this too would need to be reviewed in the context of the May Inflation Report.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##The Bank s regional Agents had carried out a special survey during February of firms  expectations of their ability to increase prices this year. This followed survey evidence a month ago that there had been an increase in such expectations - pointing to greater inflationary pressure in the##NewPara##year ahead. Price expectations in these other surveys had this month fallen back, and the Agents  conclusion from their own survey was that firms  expectations were consistent with gently increasing inflationary pressures. This was in line with the central projection for RPIX inflation in the February Inflation Report. Comparing some of those survey responses this year with expectations a year earlier, however, the proportion of firms expecting to increase prices had fallen.##NewPara##The tax changes in the Budget would lower RPIX inflation in March by about . percentage points relative to the Committee s February projection and the change in the timing of the Budget (which was a little earlier this year than last) would reduce RPIX inflation by . percentage points in April. Against this, utilities prices were likely to contribute an additional . percentage points to inflation in the second quarter, as the effects of last year s price cuts dropped out of the annual comparison. Initial estimates of the impact on food prices of the foot and mouth outbreak suggested that it could add . percentage points to the index, but these estimates were highly uncertain in timing and extent, and a wide range of outcomes was possible. So while these various effects together suggested very little net effect on inflation, timing differences could lead to erratic movements in the index over the coming months which would, the Committee agreed, have no direct significance for policy.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The news on the month was mixed. The largest uncertainty for the outlook remained that surrounding world activity, and especially the outlook for the pace of growth in the United States. While the weakness evident in recent data was not perhaps as severe as had been feared, forward- looking indicators were less reassuring. But the prospects for domestic demand were if anything a little stronger than had been expected at the time of the February Inflation Report. The changes announced in the Budget were in line with what was expected from the PBR and so had little bearing on the Committee s decision this month.##NewPara##For most members, the data did not support a further cut in the repo rate this month.   The   world economy was turning out broadly in line with the projections made at the time of the February Inflation Report.  The most likely prospect for output in the United States was perhaps a little  weaker than a month ago. While some comfort had been taken at last month s meeting from the##NewPara##recovery in US equity prices in January, they had fallen back in February - though only to the levels seen at the start of the year. Confidence there remained very weak and while the slowdown to date  had not been as abrupt as some commentators had feared, the trough might be reached rather later and the recovery might now be rather less rapid. The US slowdown could impact on the confidence of businesses and consumers in the United Kingdom, but it had not so far done so. The Japanese economy was faltering again, and its problems might be more deep-rooted than had previously been acknowledged: the difficulties were compounded by the fragility of its banking and insurance sectors. Prospects for growth in the euro area remained reasonably strong overall, though growth was a little slower than last year, and - so far - appeared little affected by the uncertainties emanating from the United States. UK exporters appeared to see improved demand from some regions which broadly offset weakness in US demand.##NewPara##The domestic prospect seemed by contrast to be slightly stronger than a month ago. Consumption was still growing strongly. Money and credit data were consistent with it continuing to do so. The downward revisions to consumption growth through last year were small and might suggest a somewhat lower modal projection, but at the same time these revisions reduced the downside risk associated with the possible need for households to rebuild their balance sheets. The housing market seemed to be regaining momentum. Investment growth through much of last year had been revised up and now seemed to be more consistent both with survey evidence and with a stronger profile over the forecast horizon. The labour market showed little sign of easing and there were modest signs of strengthening earnings growth. Inflation remained below target, but not substantially so. The most striking feature of the UK economy was the strength of demand and confidence, despite the world outlook.##NewPara##Some of these members noted the difficulties created by the current conjunction of relatively strong domestic demand and RPIX inflation edging further below target. There was little evidence yet that households were beginning to moderate their consumption in order to rebuild their balance sheets, and there were signs that the housing market was picking up again. A cut in rates now,  though in other circumstances desirable in order to move RPIX inflation back to target, might instead lead to a further stimulus to consumer spending in the short term and a further worsening of household balance sheet positions, thus increasing the scale of adjustment which would be required if sentiment were to change. Were these domestic upside risks to diminish, or the downside risks##NewPara##inherent in the world economic outlook to crystallise, it could become easier to take steps in the short run to move inflation back to target without adding to the risks in the medium term. For these members, such considerations were an important factor in their assessment of the appropriate timing of a change in the repo rate; and it was generally recognised that it would be necessary to respond to that eventuality if and when it arose.##NewPara##Some other members, while accepting that the news was mixed, concluded that a further cut in rates was justified this month. The outlook for the world economy had deteriorated, which reinforced their assessment that world activity would grow less rapidly than the best collective judgment reflected in the Committee s February projection.  Equities prices in the major markets had fallen and the number of profit warnings had increased and spread to more sectors. The  slowdown was likely to be more prolonged, and possibly deeper. Domestically, there was news in both directions. The faster growth of average earnings was worrying, and would be highly relevant if it were to persist. The pick-up in the housing market was also a potential concern. But the latest data on manufacturing pointed in the other direction and could be the first sign that the global slowdown in the information and communications technology sector was also affecting the##NewPara##More fundamental on this view was that RPIX inflation had now been below target for  months, that it was continuing to slow and that it was not clear that the projected pace of output growth would bring it back to target over the forecast horizon. In particular, these members thought it implausible that inflation would return to target at the two-year horizon, as projected in the February Inflation Report, because they did not share the implicit assumption that output was currently above its full capacity level. The fiscal stance was slightly contractionary and monetary policy - with ex post real interest rates at around % on the basis of current inflation rates - was contractionary too. A dynamic monetary conditions index showed that, on this measure and at current interest and exchange rates, conditions would continue to tighten a little for the rest of this year and then stabilise. In any case, these members had thought that a  basis point cut could have been justified in February, because they believed that the level of rates needed to be realigned. So the justification for a cut this month was not merely the most recent news. There was no great  urgency for such a cut, but the risks to inflation lay on the downside and it was preferable to take steps to bring inflation back to the target level sooner rather than later. Further cuts might be needed##NewPara##if the downside risks from the world economy materialised.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. Seven members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King,##NewPara##David Clementi, Christopher Allsopp, Charles Bean, Stephen Nickell and Ian Plenderleith) voted for the proposition. DeAnne Julius and Sushil Wadhwani voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.