Demand and output##NewPara##Output was estimated to have increased by .% between Q and Q, significantly higher than projected in the Committee s August Inflation Report; and growth in the first half of the year had been revised upwards, so that the level of activity was also higher than expected. The quarterly rate of manufacturing output growth had been % in Q. The recovery seemed to be spreading both regionally and, with some exceptions such as agriculture, sectorally. The twelve-month growth rate of final domestic demand in Q, the latest period for which data were available, had been .%, well above trend. Strong domestic demand had to some extent been offset in the first part of the year by destocking and, over a longer period, by weak net trade, reflecting the rise in sterling s exchange rate and shocks to world economic growth. Aggregate demand had therefore grown more slowly than final domestic demand, and this had contained pressures on the economy s supply capacity. More recently, however, net trade had been stronger than expected, and in Q had even made a positive contribution to GDP growth. Against this background, the Committee discussed whether the growth in demand was sustainable, and if not whether it would slow spontaneously, ie without a further policy tightening.##NewPara##Within final domestic demand, consumption growth had been especially buoyant. A number of possible special factors were identified. First, strong growth in real earnings, and so real personal disposable income, might have reflected not just tight labour market conditions, but also inflation outturns that had been lower than expected when pay bargains were struck. Other things being equal, any such effect was unlikely to continue as inflation expectations had come down over the past few years, and were now broadly in line with the  % target. However, the Committee had built into its latest central projection for inflation a number of particular downward influences on prices - such as##NewPara##utility price cuts and the effects of increased competition on retailers  margins - which would tend to reduce RPIX inflation, and it was unclear to what extent these were incorporated into wage bargainers  inflation expectations.##NewPara##Second, the rapid growth in consumption in Q and Q partly reflected recovery from the slowdown last autumn, when confidence had been hit by the shocks to the world economy and international financial markets. Third, consumer spending growth earlier in the year had partly been accounted for by an earlier-than-usual spike in car sales, reflecting changes in the timing of new registrations. That was expected to unwind in the second half of the year. Retail sales growth appeared, however, to have strengthened during the year according to data for Q and some surveys, so that overall consumption growth might not slow much. Moreover, strong output growth in Q, evidence of strong tax receipts (including corporate taxes), and the relative strength of household money and credit growth and of the housing market suggested that strong final domestic demand growth might have continued beyond the first half of the year.##NewPara##There were, though, some possible indications that consumption growth had steadied. Indicators of retail sales in Q appeared firm, but probably not more so than during Q. Both the CBI Distributive Trades Survey and the CIPS Services Index pointed to a moderation of activity. Consumer confidence measures were positive but had been steady for about eight months, and in particular had not been driven upwards along with the rapid rise in house prices. And some indicators of housing market activity, such as particulars delivered, had ticked down slightly over the past two months. The Committee judged, however, that the recent strength in house prices would tend to support continuing buoyant consumption growth. House prices were generally expected to continue rising over the next year or so at an annual rate which was higher than mortgage interest rates. In the view of some members, the resulting negative own-real rate of interest should, other things being equal, make house purchase attractive. This could alternatively be thought of as expected real capital gains more than offsetting the real cost of borrowing (measured by mortgage interest rates less expected consumer price inflation).##NewPara##Other parts of the economy were, however, facing quite different own-real interest rates. In particular, the nominal cost of borrowing for companies was still considerably higher than manufacturing output price inflation, which might hold back investment spending.##NewPara##More generally, since August the sterling yield curve had steepened, with rates in the two-to-five year range up by at least  basis points and the gap between fixed and variable mortgage rates having closed. This had increased the cost of borrowing for both companies and fixed rate mortgage borrowers. This would help to restrain demand in the medium term, and on one view was not fully reflected in the forecast. Others felt that the effects were likely to be small. (The Committee s discussion of whether the shift in market interest rate expectations had more general implications for policy setting is summarised below under  Tactical considerations .)##NewPara##The Committee agreed that final domestic demand could not continue to grow at the current rate without jeopardizing achievement of the inflation target in the medium term. Even without further monetary tightening some of the factors mentioned above were likely to restrain domestic demand growth. The Committee s latest projection incorporated a slowdown to around % by the end of the two-year forecast horizon, but that would probably still place pressures on supply capacity unless the contribution to GDP growth from stockbuilding and net trade was negative.##NewPara##Stocks had been reduced in the first part of the year, consistent with reports of excess inventory holdings at the end of . More recent reports suggested that there was little reason to expect a continuing negative contribution to GDP growth from this source in the short run.##NewPara##The principal influences on net trade pointed in different directions. On the one hand, sterling continued to be strong, and was higher than in August. On the other hand, the world economy was recovering more quickly than expected. Exports of goods (excluding oil and erratics) to countries outside the EU had grown at an annual rate of % between Q and Q; and total goods exports grew by % in the three months to August compared with the previous three months. Surveys suggested that manufacturers  expectations of export volume growth were higher than for around three years.##NewPara##While it was possible that the strength of the recent exports data partly reflected temporary factors, it was also possible that exporters had to some extent adjusted to a level of sterling that they now expected to persist. If so, the equilibrium real exchange rate might have risen, but it was too early to be at all confident about that possibility.##NewPara##To the extent that export strength were to persist, a negative contribution to GDP growth from net trade would have to come from a relatively faster increase in imports, so that the UK would in effect be relying on spare capacity abroad to contain incipient inflationary pressures from strong domestic##NewPara##demand growth. But while there was probably still spare capacity abroad, some members felt that it would be eroded as the world economy recovered, tending to put upward pressure on import prices.##NewPara##On balance, the Committee had assumed that net trade would make a negative contribution to GDP throughout the forecast period, reflecting the further rise in the sterling exchange rate and a likely increase in imports.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##There was some evidence that the labour market had tightened further. Over the quarter, claimant count unemployment had fallen to .%, and the Labour Force Survey (LFS) measure to .%. Employment had continued to rise, as had total hours worked. Some forward-looking indicators suggested continued tightening. Employment intentions, as measured by surveys, were up in all sectors and were above average historical levels. Skill shortages persisted according to the Bank s regional Agents and surveys, but with differences across regions and different types of skill. The picture from surveys was mixed. The BCC measure of recruitment difficulties had fallen slightly in both manufacturing and services. The CBI survey showed skill shortages rising slightly but with the level still below its historical average.##NewPara##Real earnings growth calculated on the basis of the Average Earnings Index (AEI) had been rising for some time, with the recent rate faster than would have been expected on the basis of the changes in unemployment and employment. As noted above, one possible explanation for this was that a##NewPara##greater-than-generally-expected decline in inflation had boosted ex post real earnings. Another possible explanation was that the  natural  rate of unemployment, the rate consistent with stable inflation, was higher than the Committee had assumed in its August projections. Some members thought it unlikely that the  natural  rate was below the current actual rate or that it was continuing to fall at the same rate as actual unemployment, so that there was good reason to think that labour market pressures had been increasing. Other members noted that the Reward Index showed earnings growth still trending lower and the New Earnings Survey also gave a more benign picture of earnings growth than the AEI. Although there were different interpretations of the latest data, the Committee agreed to take as its central projection a higher assumption for real earnings growth than in August.##NewPara##The recent nominal pay data presented a second puzzle. On the one hand, settlements had remained around .%. On the other hand, the AEI had risen at an annual rate of .% in the three##NewPara##months to August. Allowing for month-to-month volatility, the AEI series had been edging upwards in recent months. If the difference was a good guide to wage drift, it was possible that the recent rise in nominal earnings would be consolidated in forthcoming settlements. A survey by Industrial Relations Services pointed in the opposite direction, however. In its latest survey, % of respondents had expected to make lower settlements than last year, % the same, and % higher. Last year, only % had expected lower settlements than the previous year, and % had expected higher. It was suggested that the apparent fall in expected settlements this year might reflect the low recent RPI outturns (.% in August and September) and expectations that RPIX would remain below the  % target for a while. Anecdotal evidence on this, based partly on Committee members  own regional visits, varied. There were suggestions both that RPI was the starting point in negotiations, and that the benchmark was the higher of RPI or RPIX. Some employers had suggested that the recent outturn of around % was not a feasible starting point ; before allowing for productivity improvements, it was easier to argue either for zero if necessary on the basis of a particular company s circumstances, or alternatively for  % reflecting the inflation target and so medium-term inflation expectations. The Committee noted that there would not be much hard data on settlements until the new year, although the Bank s regional Agents would monitor, through their contacts, the emerging evidence.##NewPara##Whatever the position, it was possible that settlements - both backward-looking data and forward-looking surveys - were now less reliable indicators of labour market conditions given the##NewPara##decline in collective bargaining, and the increase in personalised remuneration, over recent years. If so, relatively more weight needed to be placed on the path of broader measures of earnings.##NewPara##The Committee as a whole agreed that its assessment of labour market conditions was highly uncertain. Structural changes and the new monetary regime meant that behaviour may have changed, but it was impossible to know by how much. Looking forward, the quantity data, particularly the LFS series, would be important indicators of whether there were any further tightening, and possibly of its speed. But what mattered was the extent of pressure on labour supply, for which there was no direct measure, and the extent to which this was translated into nominal earnings growth and settlements.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##The main issue concerning prices was the prospective effect on the aggregate price level, and thus on measured inflation in the short-to-medium term, of various expected developments. In particular, the Committee had made allowance in its Inflation Report projections for falls in price-cost margins##NewPara##reflecting an increase in competition; utility prices changes; and the Government s intention, announced in its pre-Budget Report published on  November, of removing the automatic over- indexation of duties on tobacco and fuel. Taken together, on the agreed assumptions these reduced the central projection for RPIX inflation by around half a percentage point at the two-year horizon (and more before that).##NewPara##Some members were content with the assumed effects for the first year but preferred a smaller effect in the second year. This was for two reasons. First, they were concerned that the Committee had focussed on some one-off price falls, whereas there might be some one-off upward pressures as well; for example, it was conceivable that, as real incomes and wealth rose, consumers were switching from cheaper, standard goods to higher-margin, customised or designer products. Second, there were doubts about reflecting expected changes in relative prices in the aggregate nominal price level at longer horizons given that, by targetting inflation, the Committee influenced nominal, not real, demand growth over the medium term. While the particular downward pressures might plausibly be unanticipated in the near-term, they would more likely be anticipated as time passed. In that case, the effects of relative price changes might not show up as a decline in the overall rate of inflation over the medium run.##NewPara##While agreeing that this analysis applied in the medium to long run, those members who supported the central assumption in the forecast argued that there was sufficiently clear evidence that the downward influences on prices would increase during at least the next two years. They agreed that it was difficult to calibrate the short-run impact of longer-term structural changes such as intensified competition. The Committee agreed that the size and persistence of the specific effects were inevitably uncertain, making it important to monitor the specific effects reflected in the published projections.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##M growth had continued to fall, the twelve-month rate reaching .% in Q, the slowest growth rate since  (when the series began). But this reflected continued falls in the money holdings of non-bank financial institutions (OFCs). OFC money and credit were generally regarded as being most relevant to analysis of monetary conditions during periods of financial market instability.##NewPara##Excluding OFCs, annual broad money growth had been .% in Q. Within this, household M growth was .%. M and household Divisia growth were each around %. Growth in net credit to##NewPara##households was .% in Q, the highest rate since . These data were broadly corroborative of the real-side evidence of continuing robust consumption growth.##NewPara##The FT All Share Index had risen by about  % over the past month, and was at about the same level as in August. House prices continued to rise rapidly, with the twelve month rate on both the Halifax and Nationwide indices above %. As already noted, since the August Inflation Report the sterling yield curve had steepened out to medium maturities.##NewPara##The sterling exchange rate index had risen by over half a percentage point since the Committee s October meeting and was about three percentage points above the path assumed in the August fan chart projections. The Committee agreed to incorporate in its published November projections an assumption that sterling would be half way between its current rate and a path related to market interest rate differentials, with the sensitivity of the projections to both shown in the Inflation Report. Some members inclined towards the former, and some preferred the latter.##NewTopic##The world economic outlook##NewPara##The Committee noted the assumptions it had made in its latest projections. The outlook in each of the US, the euro area and Japan was somewhat better, and prospects among the emerging market economies had generally improved. The overall picture was therefore slightly stronger than assumed in the Committee s August projection, although there remained clear downside risks from the possibility of an equity price correction in the USA and persistent current account imbalances.##NewPara##Against this background, Committee members agreed that the outlook for world prices looked less benign than at the time of the August Inflation Report. While there was still spare capacity in parts of the world economy, this was being utilised as a generalised recovery progressed. Imported price inflation had been weak (or negative) over the past few years, but had recently begun to rise.##NewTopic##The November inflation and output growth projections##NewPara##The Committee agreed the projections to be published in the Inflation Report on  November.##NewPara##On the assumption of constant official interest rates of .%, the central projection in the published fan chart for activity was for slightly more rapid growth in the short term than in August, levelling off to slightly above trend. The level of activity was higher than projected in August for almost all of the##NewPara##forecast period on account of the recent stronger-than-expected outturns. The balance of risks was on the downside, mainly reflecting risks to the world economic outlook.##NewPara##The Committee s best collective judgment of the prospects for inflation was for RPIX to remain below the  % target for nearly all of the forecast period, dropping just below % for a while, before increasing quite sharply to end up at around the target at the two-year horizon, when it was still rising. This acceleration in prices reflected the accumulating pressures on supply capacity from the period of above-trend demand growth and the unwinding of the various temporary downward influences on the price level and so on measured inflation. The trough was lower than in August. The projection at the end of the forecast period was almost the same as in August, but with a higher sterling exchange rate and with the official interest rate at .% rather than .%. For the same reasons as for the output projection, the balance of risks to inflation was on the downside.##NewPara##As already described, there was considerable uncertainty in the Committee about the inflation outlook, and also a range of preferred assumptions for the path of the nominal exchange rate, earnings growth, and price-cost margins; these were presented in Table .B on page  of the Inflation Report published on  November. Different members preferred different combinations of these assumptions, either raising or lowering the inflation projection at the two-year horizon by   to   percentage points, so that there was a range of approaching one percentage point between the lowest and highest preferred central projections of individual Committee members.##NewTopic##Tactical considerations##NewPara##The Committee discussed three other issues potentially relevant to its policy decision: the significance of the steepening in the sterling yield curve; the relevance of ECB and FOMC policy decisions; and the implications of the shape of the inflation projection.##NewPara##On one view, the rise over recent months in short and medium-maturity market interest rates, as evidenced by for example short sterling futures contracts and the gilt yield curve, meant that monetary conditions were materially tighter than reflected in the fan chart projections. In consequence, the market was doing some of the Committee s work for it, so that other things being equal the Committee could operate with a lower official repo rate than would otherwise be the case. Against this, it was argued that the Committee would take material risks with its credibility if it failed to tighten in line with market expectations, where it regarded those expectations as well based. If demand were##NewPara##restrained by higher market rates but the Committee then failed to raise rates, the market s view of the Committee s reaction function would change, storing up trouble for the future.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that it should not place great weight on expectations of what the ECB and FOMC might do at their meetings on  November (the same day as the MPC s meeting) and##NewPara## November respectively. It was noted that a clear majority of market participants expected the MPC to raise its rate by  basis points, in which case a move of that size would probably not have much effect on market prices.##NewPara##The shape of the inflation projection had changed materially over the past year. A year ago, it had been humped; in May and August it had had a gentle saucer shape; now inflation was projected to fall further below the target, before rising more steeply towards the end of the forecast period. This reflected the view that accumulating inflationary pressures would surface after a period in which measured inflation was held back by a series of specific price level changes. In particular, after falling back in the short run earnings growth was likely to pick up further out in the forecast period. On the one hand, the degree of uncertainty about the outlook was considerably greater at the two year horizon, so that the Committee could be less sure about the projected steep rise than it could be about the nearer- term prospect of inflation remaining below target. On the other hand, monetary policy changes would have a greater effect on inflation at around two years than on nearer-term prospects. The Committee agreed that, other things being equal, the shape of the projection meant that, compared with a profile in which inflation rose steadily, there was more time to tighten policy in order further to restrain demand growth if that still proved necessary.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee agreed that the analysis of the outlook for inflation had changed over the past few months. The news on demand and activity had been stronger than expected, whereas RPIX inflation had been weaker than expected. The short-term relationship between output and prices had for some time been uncertain, and if anything that uncertainty had increased. For a long time strong domestically-generated inflationary pressures had been offset by strongly benign external influences: the price and net trade effects of the rising pound and of the shocks to world activity. Those external influences were now smaller. Sterling had recently risen slightly, but by less than during  and , and the world economy was recovering, with consequent rises in some input costs, for example oil. The key issues were now on the one hand the size and persistence of various downward influences##NewPara##on prices, and on the other hand the more-rapid-than-expected pick up in output growth and the extent to which domestic demand growth would slow without further monetary policy tightening. Members  analysis of the immediate policy choice varied according to how they viewed those factors.##NewPara##A variety of arguments were identified in favour of an immediate increase in interest rates. Activity had recovered faster than expected, and confidence indicators had remained strong despite the September tightening of monetary policy and sterling s recent strength. A further decline in the velocity of circulation was needed for narrow money, household Divisia and household M growth to be consistent with the inflation target. Final domestic demand growth was projected to slow but still to be above trend at the forecast horizon, supported amongst other things by a strong housing market. A significant negative contribution to GDP growth from net trade was effectively being relied upon to avoid aggregate demand exceeding the economy s supply capacity. The labour market seemed again to be tightening, and there was consequently a risk that unit labour cost growth would not in fact moderate. AEI earnings growth had risen over recent months, and the Bank s regional Agents had reported greater concerns about skill shortages increasing wage growth. Although there was particular uncertainty about the relationship between output growth and inflation, members were influenced by the rise in wage pressures and the pick up in survey-based measures of pricing intentions. Input price pressures were gathering. The inflation projection was still rising at the forecast horizon so that, assuming no news in the meantime, the February projection for  Q would be higher than the target. While RPIX inflation was likely to be contained for a while by the various downward pressures on prices, a further tightening of policy was needed to restrain the medium-term inflationary implications of continued strong domestic demand. The risks from tightening and not tightening were not symmetric. An immediate  basis point increase would not carry many risks to output as growth##NewPara##was above trend and the level of activity was already probably not much, if at all, below the trend level. But there would be risks in not increasing interest rates now. The news on activity had been significantly stronger than expected since the Committee tightened pre -emptively in September, so that not tightening again risked increasing inflation expectations, entailing a larger tightening later than would otherwise have been necessary.##NewPara##As well as weighing the considerations set out in paragraph , those members of the Committee who favoured a higher central projection than that assumed - whether because of different preferred assumptions on the path of the exchange rate or price-cost margins, or on both - regarded the risks of overshooting the target as correspondingly greater. The choice for them now was between  and  basis points. While a case could be made for  basis points in order to counter the strength of##NewPara##underlying inflationary pressures, the following considerations led them to prefer a smaller rise. As the Committee had discussed, there were signs, for example in surveys, that there might be some slowing in demand growth. There was time to wait to gather evidence on this as inflation was projected to be below the  % target for nearly all of the forecast period. Separately, given market expectations, an increase of more than  basis points risked putting undue upward pressure on the exchange rate, which would tend to restrain net trade and import prices whereas policy action was needed to address domestically-generated inflationary pressures.##NewPara##One member explored the arguments for an interest rate increase of less than  basis points. The profile for inflation implied that the pressures on the economy s supply capacity needed to be restrained in the medium term but that there was time to do this, particularly given the uncertainties about the outlook. An increase of less than  basis points would assist that process and would, in particular, provide a clear signal of the Committee s resolve in addressing those medium-term concerns, while recognising the downward pressures on inflation in the near term, when it was projected to drop materially below the  % target. It would be easier for the Committee to introduce smaller-than- basis point changes now having already tightened policy in September. However, as this would be the first time rates changed by less than  basis points, there was a significant risk that the reasons would be misunderstood. The better course was, therefore, to raise rates by  basis points.##NewPara##Various arguments were advanced for maintaining the official interest rate at .%. Inflation was below target and was set to remain so over the next two years. The outlook depended to a significant degree on two material factors: the exchange rate, and the balance of aggregate demand and the economy s supply capacity. Recent export outturns added weight to the view that sterling would be stronger than the path assumed as the best collective judgment; and survey measures showed capacity utilisation falling slightly, perhaps because investment during this upswing had been strong.  There were significant downward pressures on prices, reflecting not only one-off regulatory measures but also an ongoing intensification of competition throughout the economy. This would help to restrain##NewPara##earnings growth below the path assumed as the best collective judgment. Monetary conditions, as reflected in the yield curve, had tightened significantly in recent months, and were probably bearing down on demand by rather more than had been assumed in the published fan charts. Taking these considerations together, the steep rise in the central projection of inflation  months hence was highly uncertain and there were clear downside risks to it. With a symmetric inflation target, a further tightening was not yet needed.##NewPara##The Governor invited members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank repo rate be increased by  basis points to .%. Eight members of the Committee (the Governor,##NewPara##Mervyn King, David Clementi, Willem Buiter, Charles Goodhart, Ian Plenderleith, John Vickers and Sushil Wadhwani) voted for the proposition. DeAnne Julius voted against, preferring to maintain interest rates at .%.