Sterling’s exchange rate##NewPara##Sterling had been volatile over the month, but had on average remained at broadly the same level as at the time of the May Committee meeting and somewhat above the level implied in the central assumption of the May Inflation Report. Sterling had risen against the euro since the May MPC, but had fallen against the dollar. Much of the depreciation of sterling against the dollar seemed explicable in terms of changes in market interest rate expectations - as implied by yield curves - since the previous meeting. The publication of the much stronger than expected Japanese GDP data on  June was associated with a marked strengthening of the yen, and partly as a consequence an easing of sterling.##NewPara##The depreciation of the euro against sterling and the dollar could not be accounted for purely by movements in interest rate differentials, and was more difficult to explain. Among short run factors, developments in Kosovo might explain some of the weakness in the euro, perhaps through increasing uncertainty and via its potential effects on business and consumer confidence in continental Europe. The markets might also be re-assessing the policy stance in the euro area in the light of the recent discussions of the Italian fiscal deficit in the context of the growth and stability pact. A more fundamental factor was probably continued uncertainty about the prospective strength of the euro area economy when contrasted with continuing strong growth and the pick-up in consumer prices in the United States.##NewPara##The strength in German orders data, and a stronger first quarter GDP figure than expected by the markets, had probably contributed to the slight strengthening of the euro immediately prior to the Committee s meeting. But if it simply reflected an expectation of stronger German demand, this was not apparently embodied in interest rate expectations.##NewPara##Summing up, the Committee noted that the depreciation in the euro since the turn of the year was not especially large in an historical context. Nevertheless, looking at a rate for the synthetic euro against the dollar over a longer period, the euro was stronger than in the early and##NewPara##mid-eighties, but as low as at any time over the past ten years.##NewPara##Turning to sterling, it was difficult to link recent changes in its rate against the euro to past and prospective movements in interest rate differentials. Whether or not the Committee cut at this meeting, the market might take the view that a trough in interest rates had been reached for this cycle. If that caused expectations of the future path of interest rates to be revised up then sterling might strengthen. However, it was possible that a reduction in rates at the current meeting might be accompanied by a fall in sterling. So, as always, the effect on the exchange rate of a possible reduction in interest rates was uncertain. And, in any case, the Committee agreed that whatever the expectation in the market, the future path of interest rates would depend on what developments in the economy as a whole implied for the prospects for inflation.##NewPara##It was also noted that an increase in US rates and further reduction in UK interest rates could eliminate the present short-term interest rate differential. This could be important to those with  carry trades  - a strategy of borrowing in low yielding currencies to buy higher yielding currencies. There was evidence that some market participants used this strategy. Views differed on how much weight to put on this explanation of sterling strength.##NewPara##Overall, the Committee thought that the situation had not changed much since the previous month s meeting. Sterling had remained, on average, somewhat above the central assumption in the May Inflation Report over the past month, and if it were not to weaken as assumed, it raised the likelihood that inflation would undershoot the target.##NewTopic##The world economy##NewPara##There was not much sign of a slowdown in the US economy over the month. The Federal Open Market Committee had recently moved to a bias to tighten. Equity markets had been relatively stable over the month. Taken together the news suggested that the probability of a soft landing for the US economy had improved.##NewPara##Some of the backward looking data in the euro area continued to look quite weak. But the recent orders and unemployment data had been better than expected. German GDP had increased by .% in the first quarter, and was slightly stronger than expected by the markets, but it##NewPara##contained little news relative to the Committee s central assumption in its May projections. The more forward-looking indicators - such as consumer and business confidence - had perhaps shown signs of stabilising.##NewPara##Many of the recent Japanese monthly indicators had been distorted by the Golden Week holidays, which made seasonal adjustment more difficult. But, on balance, they probably suggested that activity was broadly flat. Growth in the monetary base had, however, increased. The GDP figure for the first quarter - released on  June - had been surprisingly strong and the stock market had initially rallied. But no analysis of the GDP data was yet available. The Committee noted that there had been quite large quarterly volatility in Japanese GDP over recent years, so were cautious in reading much into one strong quarterly number.##NewPara##The yields on dollar-denominated bonds issued by emerging market economy governments had risen relative to US Treasury bond yields as expectations of a tightening of US monetary policy had increased, though they had shown signs of easing back down more recently. But prospects in Asia seemed a little brighter than a month ago, as did the situation in Brazil and Latin America more generally. Some official Chinese interest rates had recently been reduced by %.##NewPara##Overall, the news on prospects for the world economy had been mildly positive over the month, with the euro area and Japan looking a little stronger. The prospects of a soft landing in the United States seemed to have improved, and the downside risks to emerging markets might have eased.##NewTopic##Monetary and financial conditions##NewPara##The strength of the housing market was evident in both price and activity data. The Halifax and Nationwide house price indexes had both risen strongly in May, and the annual rates of increase were now rising. The aggregate rise in house prices over recent months was probably within the bounds of what might be expected given changes in interest rates since last autumn. There were signs of the strengthening housing market in the household sector lending figures, which had continued to rise over recent months. The Committee recalled that looking forward, its assumption in the central projection of the May forecast was that house prices would rise in line with nominal earnings, which would need to be reviewed in the context of the next forecasting round.##NewPara##Forward short maturity interest rates had risen substantially over the past month, in part reflecting changing expectations about the timing of possible UK entry into EMU and in part accompanying the rise in short maturity rates in the US. Longer maturity nominal bond yields had risen - reflecting those factors and continued fading of the after-effects of the LTCM crisis, which had depressed yields - whereas there had been little change in the yields on UK index-linked government bonds. The Committee discussed the implications of these developments for real rates and inflation expectations.##NewPara##As discussed by the Committee at its January meeting, there was some uncertainty about the level of real yields signalled by index-linked bonds. In particular, past changes to rules relating to pension fund holdings of bonds had led to an increased holding of index-linked bonds by that sector. It seemed that the changes had prolonged effects on yields, as stock holdings were adjusted following actuarial guidance. But it was not clear that this would have significantly distorted the change in implied UK inflation expectations over the past month. However, there had only been a slight rise in inflation expectations in the surveys of other forecasters  projections, which on average had now risen back towards the inflation target of .%. Therefore, since it was not plausible that inflation expectations had risen by as much as short maturity forward rates, it was likely that short-term real yields had risen.##NewPara##At the short end of the curve, there were signs that building society and other lenders had raised interest rates on fixed rate mortgages, so some tightening had occurred. For loans advanced on variable, rather than fixed, interest rates, there had been only a small pass-through of the reduction of official rates in April.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The latest data provided no firm reasons to move away from the central projections for demand and output made at the time of the May Inflation Report. GDP growth had been revised down .% in the first quarter, and was now flat on the headline market price measure and had fallen slightly measured at basic prices. After adjusting for volatile components such as energy - which had been weak in the first quarter - growth of GDP at basic prices was still in line with the May central projection, at .%. The staff s latest estimates, based on survey evidence on new orders, suggested a pick-up in GDP growth in Q. This pick-up was still broadly consistent with the May central projection. The National Institute of Economic and Social Research had released its monthly GDP estimate following publication of the industrial production figures. It showed##NewPara##growth of .% in the three months to May, which also suggested an increase in growth from the trough at the turn of the year.##NewPara##Within the expenditure breakdown of GDP, there were some signs that the usually##NewPara##less-volatile components - such as consumption - were stronger on the quarter, while those that were typically more volatile - such as investment - were weaker. However, even in the case of consumption there were special factors. In particular, the change in the registration date for new car sales meant that seasonal adjustment of the Q data was difficult and that underlying consumption was probably a little weaker than the headline numbers suggested. That said, the figure was still likely to have been stronger than the Committee had assumed in its May projections. There had been a continuing rise in consumer confidence over recent months. One puzzle was the recent weakness of retail sales in both the official data and in surveys, given the strength of Q consumption and consumer confidence.##NewPara##Business surveys had also shown signs of further improvement over the past month, although the tone being reported to the Bank s regional Agents was, on balance, a little softer than this.##NewPara##The latest monthly trade data had pointed to a greater weakening of exports - particularly to the EU - compared to the assumption in the May Inflation Report. The CBI survey, while showing an improvement in domestic orders, still recorded considerable pessimism about export orders. The corresponding question in the CIPS survey had, however, shown a recovery in export orders. Although the latest batch of surveys had been conducted after the recent appreciation in sterling, there was some concern about the fragility of the overall rise in survey balances, especially if sterling were to remain strong. The Bank s regional Agents  survey suggested that many companies were expecting sterling to depreciate.##NewPara##The income and expenditure release of the National Accounts also included a sharp fall in the figure for companies  operating profits in the first quarter, which followed a fall in the fourth quarter. The latest evidence on the number of profit warnings, and analysts  profit expectations for , did not yet provide any corroborative evidence of such a sharp fall in the first quarter. It was difficult to know how much weight to place on the fall, until firmer data on profits had been fed into the accounts by the ONS. The operating profit figure included an adjustment, to ensure that the income, expenditure and output measures were aligned from quarter to quarter, but the details of any adjustment in Q would not be published by the ONS until the full National Accounts release. The ONS had suggested that the construction output figures were less firmly grounded than usual. As usual, in the run up to the annual re-balancing of the National Accounts there were a number of puzzles in the data, and there were likely to be revisions in due course. It##NewPara##was not possible at this stage to draw any firm conclusions about the likely direction and scale of any revisions.##NewTopic##Labour Market##NewPara##There had not been much news on labour market quantities over the past month, relative to what had been expected in the May projections. But looking back over the past three or four months it was, perhaps, still surprising that the labour market had not weakened by as much as expected at the start of the year.##NewPara##On the prices side, earnings growth in the year to March, as measured by the Average Earnings Index, had been in line with the assumption in the May Inflation Report. The Reward index had continued to fall. The disparate movements in the public and private sectors complicated the picture for settlements. Recent public sector awards had pushed up the aggregate whole economy twelve-month employment-weighted mean to .%, despite a continuing fall in private sector settlements. A matched sample of private sector settlements also showed that they were lower in April than in the corresponding period last year. More work would be needed on the impact on RPIX inflation of the public sector settlements, both directly and indirectly via their effects on private sector behaviour. As the April figures were not yet available, it was still too early to judge whether the effect of the National Minimum Wage on earnings was in line with the assumption made in the Committee s projections.##NewPara##The continued strength in the latest employment data implied another weak productivity growth figure in the first quarter, and a corresponding rise in unit labour costs. This would continue the pattern of weak productivity growth figures seen over the past four years. The fact that employment continued to grow, and that there had been no significant rise in unemployment, might be consistent with the finding of the Agents  survey. The survey results suggested that, while many companies assumed no change in sterling, more companies were expecting sterling s exchange rate to fall than to rise, and companies might consequently be delaying adjustments to their workforce for as long as possible. However, this could not explain much of the apparent weakness of productivity growth in recent years. Another possible explanation, among several discussed in recent Inflation Reports, continued to be that output was underrecorded, and that the true rate of productivity growth was stronger than recorded, although there was no firm evidence for this. The limited data available for the service sector, relative to manufacturing, made it difficult to reach conclusions in this area.##NewPara##Looking at productivity growth over a longer period, it was probably best to assume that the trend rate of productivity growth - which was what was important for assessing inflationary pressure - had not changed significantly over recent years. Indeed, average productivity growth since  was not out of line with its long-run historical trend.##NewTopic##Prices##NewPara##The Committee noted that both including and excluding oil, sterling commodity prices on the Bank s UK demand-weighted index were now rising in annual terms. The oil price had stabilised in recent weeks. Brent was currently trading at around $-$ per barrel, and was a little below the peak reached in early May. The oil price was now broadly in line with the assumption made in the May Inflation Report for the middle of this year.##NewPara##RPIX inflation had fallen by slightly more than expected in April, largely on account of seasonal foods, which were usually quite volatile. The latest ONS advance estimate of RPIX, which was not usually available at the time of the Committee meeting, suggested that the May figure would also turn out weaker than had previously been expected. Although this seemed likely to have implications for the short-term inflation projection, it was not clear to what extent there was any news for the inflation projections looking two years or so ahead. The recent and prospective fall in RPI inflation to levels well below RPIX, on account of previous reductions in mortgage interest rates, might further reduce pay settlements.##NewTopic##Other considerations bearing on the policy decision this month##NewPara##The Committee s statement the previous month explaining its decision had said that if sterling were not to decline as assumed in the central projection of the May Inflation Report, it was likely that inflation would undershoot the inflation target over the coming two years. And, in those circumstances, depending on other developments in the economy, there might, therefore, need to be further easing of interest rates in order to keep inflation on track to meet the  % target. At this meeting the Committee reviewed the time frame over which it might need to take action if sterling remained strong and there were no other offsetting developments affecting the inflation outlook. One issue was how big the deviation in exchange rates from the May assumption needed to be in order to be quantitatively significant in terms of the forecast of inflation. Another issue was the appropriate filter to use to smooth high frequency movements in the exchange rate.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##On one view a further reduction in the official interest rate of  basis points was needed to meet the inflation target. There were various strands to this argument, to which members attached different weights.##NewPara##The exchange rate had on average been stronger over the past month than incorporated in the May Report. If that strength were to persist, then the likelihood of inflation falling below target would have increased. Although the statement issued last month did not mean that action had to be taken immediately if sterling did not weaken as assumed in the central projection, there seemed to be no advantage in waiting.##NewPara##Some members of the Committee were uneasy, on empirical grounds, about the use of the Uncovered Interest Parity assumption in the central projection, and for them sterling s persistent strength was not a surprise. They placed weight on the observation that a further reduction in UK rates, and the future increase in US rates expected by the market, might mean that the UK would no longer have the highest short-term interest rates of the G countries.##NewPara##Some members were also impressed by the fact that since the turn of the year, sterling had consistently turned out stronger than assumed each month. And although the May Inflation Report fully reflected the appreciation of the exchange rate in the first part of the year, its persistent rise created a greater sense of underlying strength and weakened perceptions of the likelihood of the sustained fall in sterling that was assumed in the central projection.##NewPara##Private sector wage settlements had continued to fall, although there had been a rise in public sector settlements. The fall in RPI inflation relative to RPIX might further depress settlements. In addition to the news on the exchange rate, the recent outturns and short-term outlook for RPIX suggested that the saucer shape evident in the May central projection for inflation would, if anything, be a little deeper and more protracted than thought then. It might be possible to##NewPara##mitigate this slightly by prompt action, without risking too sharp an upturn in prospective inflation further ahead.##NewPara##Although house prices were rising, so far this seemed consistent with the reduction in interest rates since October. The yield curve had steepened over the past month, and interest rates at maturities of - years had risen substantially so that, to the extent that this represented a rise in real rates, some tightening had effectively taken place.##NewPara##Some members thought that, although the forward-looking survey indicators were stronger over the past month, consumer and business confidence indicators were still fragile. There was still relatively little firm evidence from official data that activity had picked up in the second quarter. The latest trade data had suggested that the immediate outlook for exports was still deteriorating. The recent weakness of retail sales in both the official data and in surveys, while supported by the Agents  reports, was puzzling. It suggested that expenditure was not yet accelerating. A further reduction in interest rates might help to support business and consumer confidence, which would make the projected upturn in activity more likely, especially in the light of the Agents  survey of companies  exchange rate expectations.##NewPara##Overall, as sterling had not fallen back and given developments in private sector wage settlements and the short-term outlook for retail prices, as well as the tightening of monetary conditions during the month through the rise in short-term market interest rates, those members who had voted for a reduction in the official interest rate the previous month remained of that view; and some others agreed that the balance of risks to inflation now warranted a modest reduction in the official interest rate this month.##NewPara##On another view, there was not a convincing case for a further reduction in the official interest rate. There were three main considerations. First, sterling had been volatile over the month, and the level of the exchange rate index on the morning of the Committee meeting was not significantly different from that assumed in the central projection of the May Inflation Report. It was better not to place too much weight on high frequency movements in sterling between quarterly Inflation Report projection rounds. Second, there had not been much news to change the picture for activity over the past month. The world economy looked a little brighter. On the domestic economy, backward-looking indicators were mixed. Output growth had been revised down a little but non-oil output was still rising. Most forward-looking indicators - such as household and business surveys - continued to improve. Consumption growth was strong and house prices had risen sharply over the past month. The full effects of the earlier reduction in interest rates from .% to .% had yet to be seen.  There were no strong grounds for diverging from the central projection in the May Report. Third, even though there had been little news on activity, RPIX inflation had turned out a little weaker than expected. In consequence, the short-term outlook for inflation was if anything a little lower than a month ago, but there was only a limited amount that the Committee could do at this very short horizon. The implications of the latest ONS advance estimate of RPIX were not clear. In setting monetary policy it was necessary to look further ahead. Looking further out, there was little to change the view,##NewPara##embodied in the May projection, that the benign effects on inflation of the rise in sterling and falls in import prices would be wearing off as domestic activity recovered. There had also been a slight rise in inflation expectations as measured by surveys, which was an indicator that the Committee had placed weight on in the past.##NewPara##The Governor invited the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be reduced by  basis points to .%. Eight members of the Committee (the Governor,##NewPara##David Clementi, Willem Buiter, Charles Goodhart, DeAnne Julius, Ian Plenderleith, John Vickers and Sushil Wadhwani) voted for the proposition. Mervyn King voted against, preferring to maintain the Bank s repo rate at .%.