The world economy##NewPara##The main global economic news at the Committee s previous meeting had been the substantial falls in equity prices around the world, despite some recovery in the week before the meeting. During August, equity markets had stabilised above the low points reached in July. In the days before the Committee s current meeting, however, there had been further sharp falls, which had taken prices lower on the month, but markets remained volatile and little significance could be attached to##NewPara##short-term movements. The falls in the United States on  September had been associated with the release of weak business survey data. And whereas the earlier falls had been broadly uniform across countries in local currency terms, the latest falls had been differentiated: the main US and UK indices had fallen back to levels which were at or only a little below those used as the starting point for the projections in the August Inflation Report, while the Topix was % and the Eurostoxx % lower than when those projections were made. US and UK price/earnings ratios remained high by long-term historical standards, and market expectations (as reflected in options prices) were still skewed to the downside.##NewPara##In reviewing the possible explanations for these events, it was noted that the latest falls were unlikely to reflect renewed concerns about accounting standards or corporate governance. The##NewPara## August deadline set by the Securities and Exchange Commission for CEOs and CFOs of large public companies to attest personally to the veracity of their company s accounts had passed successfully; and there had been no significant accounting or governance news since that date. That pointed to conventional concerns about longer-run profitability as a more likely cause. Nervousness about the possibility of military action in Iraq might also be a factor. But that possibility had been a##NewPara##concern for some weeks and the economic implications of such action were unclear. If concerns about profitability were the explanation, it was puzzling that the largest falls in prices had been in Japanese and euro-area equity markets.##NewPara##Turning to the news on world activity, recent data from the United States were broadly consistent with the Committee s August projections (which, perhaps because they had already incorporated the July news on equity prices, had been below those of many outside commentators). Growth in the rest of this year had always been expected to be weaker than growth in the first quarter, which had been driven by the turnaround in the inventory cycle.  Business surveys and confidence were softer in July, though non- defence new orders were up and broad money growth was no longer falling rapidly. Despite the higher level of unemployment, consumption too was holding up, supported by strong auto sales. The zero interest finance deals now available might suggest that auto consumption was simply being brought forward. If so, the .% monthly growth of retail sales excluding autos might be a better measure of the underlying strength of consumer demand. But the sharp increase in mortgage refinancing, at current lower long-term rates of interest, could help sustain consumption growth. It was also mildly encouraging that the latest survey of senior loan officers suggested that credit conditions were tightening less rapidly than in recent months.##NewPara##Outside commentators were beginning to revise down their forecasts for US growth, bringing them more into line with the Committee s own projection. There was nonetheless a question about what the fall in long bond yields implied for the outlook. Dollar bond yields were now around  basis points lower than had been incorporated in the Inflation Report projection, and implied a lower path  for US short-term interest rates. This fall in yields would provide some stimulus to demand and so might, in the absence of other shocks, be consistent with a rather stronger prospect for growth than the Committee had judged likely in August, particularly as long rates seemed to play an important role in the US monetary policy transmission mechanism.##NewPara##Economic news from the euro area continued to be weaker than expected. Consumption growth remained subdued and was weaker than could easily be explained by its determinants. It could be that households in the euro area tended to have less recourse to borrowing to smooth consumption than was usual in the United States or the United Kingdom. It was possible also that consumer resistance to recent price increases for some items, which some associated with the introduction of euro notes and coin, was a factor. Business surveys and confidence had weakened, consistent with the recent##NewPara##weakness of investment growth, and sustained domestically generated growth remained elusive. Policy could however respond, and some easing in monetary stance was already implied by the lower level of euro market interest rates.##NewPara##Japanese economic developments were very difficult to interpret, as a new approach to the measurement of activity had resulted in a sharper-than-expected downward revision to what had previously been estimated as strong growth in the first quarter. Despite the preliminary estimate of .% growth in the second quarter, it was still unclear whether sustained recovery there was under way. More encouragingly, however, the rest of Asia seemed to be growing quite strongly. There were grounds for thinking that this growth, particularly in China, Korea and India, was to a significant extent domestically generated. So the recovery in this region might be less dependent on the strength of the US economy than might have been thought.##NewPara##A number of Latin American countries continued to face severe economic problems, though the news on the month had if anything been positive, with support for the IMF package agreed for Brazil and lower spreads on Brazilian bonds, and some signs of stabilisation in Argentina.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##The other key financial development over the month was the downward shift in yield curves around the world. The movement at short maturities was not surprising:  the perceived monetary policy consequence of recent events had been that official rates would, for a while, be lower than they would otherwise have been. More puzzling was the movement in long-term forward rates, which had fallen by about  basis points in the United Kingdom (and on a similar scale in other major economies), reversing increases earlier in the year. This fall seemed largely to represent lower real rates. It was possible that it reflected market doubts about the speed of recovery, or that the volatility in equity markets had increased the attractiveness of government bonds. But it was not obviously related to any particular economic news. While long forward rates had tended in the past to move by more than could be explained simply by movements in short rates, the scale of the movement in long real rates had recently been unusually large. In the short term, at least, a change in attitudes towards risk might account for such movements.##NewPara##In aggregate, the UK monetary data showed some signs of slowing: broad money growth, at .% in the year to July, continued the gradual slowing evident since late last year and the annualised three-month growth rate of notes and coin had fallen to .% in August (though this was affected by the Jubilee holidays). The annual growth in total bank credit, which had been % a year ago, had slowed further, from .% to .%, over the past month. But it was the corporate sector, including financial companies, which accounted for this easing. Household borrowing, by contrast, was .% higher than a year ago and mortgage equity withdrawal was estimated to have been  . billion, equivalent to .% of personal disposable income, in the second quarter. That was close to the rate seen in the late s. Recent data suggested that it could again be high in the third quarter.##NewPara##Sterling s effective exchange rate had fallen by about % since the Committee s previous meeting. That brought it back close to the rate in the August Inflation Report projections.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##Consumption was estimated by ONS to have increased by .% in the second quarter. While the monetary and some of the housing market indicators suggested that it still had considerable momentum, retail sales growth had eased, to .% in July, and the latest CBI Distributive Trades survey indicated further slowing in sales growth in August.   It was possible too that further  notifications to households of shortfalls in endowment policy returns might dampen consumption looking forward. Some slowing in consumption growth was anticipated for later in the year, in the projections made in the August Inflation Report.##NewPara##In reviewing the contrasting evidence on current and prospective consumption growth, it was noted that real personal disposable incomes might well have grown less rapidly in the second quarter and that households might have responded by increasing their borrowing. Equally, retail sales represented only part of consumption. Apart from vehicle sales, no information was yet available for the third quarter on its other components. In addition, the CBI survey measure had not been a consistently good predictor of retail sales; and business surveys tended to be less reliable in the main holiday period than at other times. Forward-looking information from the housing market did not suggest any unexpectedly abrupt slowing: indeed, the preview of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors  survey showed a pick-up in expectations of house price increases, reversing its recent trend. Again, however, seasonal factors were significant at this time of year. The survey did,##NewPara##nevertheless, still imply the prospect of slower house price inflation than had been seen in the past few months.##NewPara##The data on output were also difficult to interpret, because of the effects of the Jubilee-related switch of a Bank Holiday from May to June and the additional Bank Holiday in June itself. Manufacturing output had fallen by .% in June, and so had fallen for six consecutive quarters   the longest decline in the post-war period. This had converted an expected .% growth of production in the second quarter into a fall of the same amount; and the ONS estimate of GDP growth had been revised down to .%, from the .% estimate in the preliminary release. Staff estimates of the likely July outturn for manufacturing output, based on the assumption that May and June together had been little affected by the Jubilee, had suggested that it would increase by about  % in July. The data, which became available to the Committee during its meeting, showed growth of .%. So the stronger-than-expected May and weak June outturns did indeed seem to be consistent with##NewPara##Jubilee-related holiday effects. The officia l data for the past few months, taken as a whole, together with surveys of activity, investment intentions and orders, still pointed to a gentle recovery in underlying manufacturing output.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##The Labour Force Survey data for the second quarter showed the largest quarterly increase in numbers employed, but also the largest fall in average hours worked, for over two years. The employment increase had, however, been predominantly in part-time workers; and average hours were affected by the Jubilee holidays. Taken together, and allowing for the temporary Jubilee effects, it seemed that labour demand might be a little weaker than expected. The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply surveys of employment (which did not include the public sector) were weaker in August, as was the Recruitment and Employment Confederation survey of placements by agencies. Public sector spending, however, was in line with plans which embodied increases in public sector employment, on which no second quarter data were yet available.##NewPara##Earnings developments also seemed benign, with annual earnings growth apparently stable at around % and its level no longer affected by temporarily weak bonuses. Pay settlements too were little changed. The indications of somewhat weaker-than-expected private sector labour demand reduced the risk that next year s pre-announced increases in National Insurance contributions would be##NewPara##reflected in higher pay settlements, though the Bank s regional Agents reported that firms were at least as concerned about the growing cost of pension provision.##NewPara##Public sector pay, as measured by the ONS data, was increasing less strongly than might have been expected on the basis of the pay review body awards and the government s declared intention to increase public sector employment. The delay in this year s Local Authorities  pay settlement might, however, be distorting the data.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##RPIX inflation had picked up sharply in July from the .% June outturn, and at .% was stronger than expected   mainly because of a larger-than-expected contribution from goods prices. June and July together, however, were in line with earlier expectations. The near-term outlook was now for inflation to move back to target by the end of this year, with a growing contribution from housing depreciation and with price falls last year dropping out of the annual comparison, but to ease thereafter. So while the immediate prospect was for inflation to be a little higher than had been reflected in the Committee's August Inflation Report projection, it was not clear that the latest data had any implications for inflation further out.##NewPara##Oil prices had strengthened in recent months. While input prices were lower on the annual comparison, they were now falling less rapidly and should soon stabilise. Together, these factors suggested rising pressures at the start of the pricing chain and that output price inflation might therefore start to increase in the coming months. However, the August CBI Distributive Trades survey suggested that retailers  price expectations had fallen quite sharply since May.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##None of the economists polled by Reuters expected a change in the repo rate this month. There was some expectation now, reflected in the pattern of market rates, that the next change would be a reduction in rates at some point over the next few months, though not at this month s meeting.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The world economy was on balance a little weaker than it had appeared to be a month ago. That weakness was, in the case of the United States, evident less in the macroeconomic data than in the fresh turbulence in equity markets. But equity prices there had so far not fallen below the levels embodied in the Committee s August projections, and the fall in market interest rates would tend to counteract the economic effects of these equity price falls. In the euro area, the weakness of domestic demand was more pronounced than previously expected. The prospects for Japan remained subdued. Other Asian economies, however, seemed stronger.##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, the key issue was how much weight should be put on the tentative signs that consumption growth and house price inflation might be starting to slow. The Committee shared the view that the recent pace of house price inflation could not safely be sustained for long; and had for some time wanted to see a gradual slowing in consumption growth, to accommodate expected stronger government and external demand. Such slowing would however be unwelcome if it were to be too abrupt or too early, particularly if the recovery in world activity were to be less strong.##NewPara##The Committee explored the case for reducing the repo rate this month. The world outlook remained fragile. Though the prospects for world activity did not seem to be substantially different from those embodied in the Committee s latest projections, outside commentators were now lowering their own expectations and   despite the falls in market interest rates   the risks were on the downside. In addition, it seemed possible that consumption growth in the United Kingdom was already starting to slow and the pace of house price inflation to ease. Against the background of a possibly weaker world outlook, pre-emptive action to delay the slowing in consumption growth might now be warranted.##NewPara##The Committee nevertheless agreed that it was premature to conclude that further stimulus was necessary. Developments over the past month were not inconsistent with the forecasts in the August Inflation Report. Once due allowance had been made for the effects of the Jubilee holidays on the pattern of output in May, June and July, there was little evidence that the UK recovery was faltering. The evidence of consumption growth slowing prematurely was not clear-cut. To reduce interest rates at this stage could give undue encouragement to households to accumulate yet more debt, and renew the upward pressure on house prices.##NewPara##Finally, the Committee noted that a decision to maintain the repo rate at % did not represent a lack of response to the slower-than-expected recovery in world activity and the marked falls in equity prices. For much of this year, the prospect had been that inflation would be moving sharply above target at the two-year horizon.  As a result, it had been widely expected that official interest rates would by now need to be on an upward path. That the repo rate had still not been increased in itself represented a policy response to the changed prospect for inflation. This was reflected in lower market interest rates, maintaining monetary conditions which continued to support the growth of domestic demand. The Committee remained ready to take further action, by reducing rates, if and when any additional stimulus to demand were judged to be necessary to meet the inflation target.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.