The world economy##NewPara##The outlook for the world economy had deteriorated since the Committee s May Inflation Report projections. World industrial production had been falling, and the slowdown was clearly set to be more prolonged than in -. In the most recent month, there had been more news about continental Europe than about Japan or the US.##NewPara##Nevertheless, the forward-looking prospect depended heavily on the US. Perhaps reflecting very strong growth in investment over recent years, capacity utilisation was now low and corporate profitability weak. Some parts of the corporate sector were under financial pressure. Investment had already fallen and seemed set to remain weak. Meanwhile, the household sector had so far been more resilient than many commentators had expected, with consumption growth remaining robust. GDP was estimated to have grown by .% in Q, down from .% in Q. There had also been material revisions to data for earlier periods, particularly . GDP growth in  had been revised down significantly, as had consumption growth, investment in the information and communications technology (ICT) sector, and corporate profits. In consequence, it now seemed that past productivity growth   especially for    was likely to be revised down somewhat. Household income had, however, been revised up, so the household saving ratio was now estimated to be higher than previously thought; it was now positive rather than negative and while it had declined steadily in the late s, it was now estimated to have stabilised early last year.##NewPara##Against that background, the Committee discussed various risks to the US outlook. On the one hand, downside risks arose from the imbalances in the economy and potentially stretched corporate and household sector balance sheets, reflecting substantial debt accumulation in recent years. It was possible that the evident pressures on the corporate sector would, via rising unemployment and reduced real income growth, feed through to the household sector and so to consumption growth in due course; in the view of some members, forward-looking survey indicators (for example the##NewPara##National Association of Purchasing Managers index) did not suggest an imminent recovery in the corporate sector, which therefore carried the associated risk of a spillover into weaker consumption, and yet Consensus forecasts assumed that consumption growth would rise. Although down around % since the beginning of the year, on some assumptions equity market valuations remained elevated, and were GDP growth to be more sluggish than implied by the consensus, there would be a risk of further falls in equity prices. Also, estimates of trend productivity might be revised down in the light of the revised GDP data, to a greater or lesser extent depending on how much weight had been given to the earlier, unrevised data for ; some commentators were already doing so. If productivity growth were lower, the corporate sector might also be weaker than expected.##NewPara##On the other hand, there were some upside risks. Taken together, the easing of monetary policy and of fiscal policy was large by historical standards and might provide more stimulus than was reflected in the central projections. In addition, the recent data revisions might imply less need for households to increase their saving in order to rebuild balance sheets, so consumption might be stronger than expected.##NewPara##Overall, while the outlook was still highly uncertain, US prospects were judged by most members to remain broadly in line with the assumptions made by the Committee in its May projections, with the risks still skewed to the downside; other members preferred a lower central projection for US growth.##NewPara##The outlook in Japan was weak. It seemed to be heading for recession; and the difficult conjunctural and structural policy issues remained. There had not been much news over the past month.##NewPara##By contrast, there had been quite a lot of news about the euro area, where the outlook was now weaker than previously assumed.  There were distinct, but interacting, domestic and external influences at work. In part, the slowdown in domestic demand in recent months might have reflected a supply shock. In particular, spikes in energy prices and food prices, combined with the fall in the euro s exchange rate earlier in the year, had taken consumer price inflation higher than had been expected. That might have reduced growth in real personal disposable incomes and so weakened consumption. The effect of the shock on domestic demand should in principle be temporary, although it might persist for a while, for example if the consequent slowdown in GDP growth prompted the corporate sector to lay off workers. While investment intentions had been stable in recent months according to the latest European Commission survey, surveys of new orders were still weakening, and##NewPara##business and consumer confidence had fallen further. As well as the domestic influences, weaker confidence might reflect the impact on euro area multinational companies of the world economic slowdown, as well as the effect on the business sector generally of the global fall in demand for ICT. While ICT industries represented a materially smaller share of output in the euro area than in the US, their contribution to GDP growth had risen over the past few years. There were other contrasts with the US.  On the one hand, imbalances were less pronounced and, in particular, corporate and household sector balance sheets were less obviously vulnerable. On the other hand, there was perhaps less prospect of a pronounced policy easing given the euro area s fiscal guidelines and inflation having been above the zone defined by the European Central Bank (ECB) as consistent with price stability.##NewPara##Overall, while the euro area was less vulnerable to a sharp deterioration than the US, growth could remain sluggish for some time, although some of the factors slowing growth were temporary. This was reflected in a downward adjustment to the Committee s latest projections compared with May.##NewPara##The considerable uncertainties about US and euro area growth prospects were associated with similar uncertainties about exchange rates. Some members of the Committee placed little weight on the possibility of the euro recovering against the dollar in the near term, given the deterioration in the euro area outlook and continuing market uncertainties about ECB policy. Others thought it possible that a reappraisal of US prospects could affect exchange rates, even if there were no change to the euro area outlook.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##GDP growth had eased to .% in Q from .% in Q. Excluding utilities, mining and quarrying, and agriculture   typically, the more volatile components of GDP   output had been up only about .% on the quarter. It was noted that this was the third successive quarter in which growth had been below trend; and that survey-based measures suggested that growth in Q might be below trend too.##NewPara##Some members noted, however, that in recent quarters growth had been temporarily depressed by adverse weather, travel disruptions and foot-and-mouth disease.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the possible implications for policy of the imbalances in the UK economy against the background of divergent pictures of household consumption and corporate spending.##NewPara##The Committee had for some time been expecting a slowdown in consumption growth that had so far failed to materialise. There had been   and continued to be   good reasons to expect deceleration. Given weaker equity prices, there had been a fall in household financial wealth; and the growth of both employment and real incomes was expected to slow. But it remained unclear how quickly consumption growth would weaken. While the National Accounts data for Q had recorded##NewPara##softer-than-expected consumption growth, those data sat uneasily with strong growth in retail sales and private vehicle registrations in Q and Q, and with the narrow and Divisia monetary data.##NewPara##Forward-looking indicators were also strong. Household borrowing and house prices were both rising at an annual rate of about %. The July CBI Distributive Sales survey had pointed to continuing robust retail sales. The GfK measure of consumer confidence remained above its average levels and had softened only slightly in the latest month, although the MORI index was weaker.##NewPara##By contrast, investment spending had weakened. Business investment was estimated to have fallen sharply, by roughly %, in Q; and while this would to some extent reflect quarter-to-quarter volatility, taking Q and Q together showed a distinct softening since earlier last year. Looking ahead, both surveys and reports from the Bank s regional Agents pointed to a somewhat weaker outlook.##NewPara##These contrasting pictures were mirrored in divergent output data for sectors relatively exposed to the external environment and for those which were relatively sheltered. For  H, the annualised rates of growth in services, construction and manufacturing were estimated to be %, % and minus % respectively.##NewPara##Manufacturing   much, but not all, of which was internationally tradeable   was overall in recession. The pressure on the sector was not just an ICT story. While there had been particularly pronounced falls in the previously strong electrical and optical equipment sector, growth in the remainder of manufacturing had been flat for a number of years and reflected structural change rather than cyclical weakness together with the high exchange rate. Survey indicators all pointed to continuing weakness in the sector as a whole, although some had improved slightly in the latest month and the picture was not uniform across the sector.##NewPara##Taken as a whole, services sector growth and profitability had so far remained far stronger than manufacturing. The first estimate of  Q service sector output growth had, though, been .%, slower than in previous quarters. There had been an expectation of some temporary weakness on##NewPara##account of the effects of the foot-and-mouth epidemic on services such as tourism, hotels and catering. But the slowdown might be greater than such temporary factors could account for. The CIPS services survey had fallen in July; at ., the balance of respondents reporting growth in business activity was at its lowest level since February . It was, therefore, possible that, in addition to temporary domestic factors, some parts of the business services sector were now being adversely affected by the global slowdown and by the pressures on domestic manufacturing.##NewPara##The factors behind this contrasting picture were reasonably clear. The externally exposed parts of the economy were under pressure from the weakening external environment and the persistent strength of sterling s exchange rate, which was % higher than had been projected in May on account of the euro s further depreciation. In order to offset to some degree the prospective negative contribution to output growth from net trade, the Committee had eased monetary policy by a cumulative  basis points during the first half of the year, buttressing consumption growth. Since then, the external outlook had deteriorated further, as had business investment in the United Kingdom. There were also signs of excess stock holdings.##NewPara##In the face of weakening external demand, the Committee had reduced interest rates in order to maintain aggregate demand in line with the economy s supply capacity, despite the increasing imbalances in the economy. The Committee debated whether or not there were risks to the policy of continuing to stimulate domestic demand to offset a weaker-than-expected world economy. Several points were noted. First, if consumption were to be stimulated by successive further policy easings, it might build up momentum which could prove difficult to arrest when the world economy eventually recovered, requiring a sharper-than-usual policy tightening in due course. Against that, however, it was noted that if buoyant consumption were accompanied by a substantial further accumulation of debt in the household sector, its exposure to interest rate changes would be greater, so that a##NewPara##smaller-than-usual tightening might be needed to slow consumption. Any risk of debt deflation would, on this view, work in the direction of dampening household spending. Also, not reducing interest rates in the face of a weakening global economy could hurt investment and thereby depress the UK economy s future productive capacity. Second, it was possible that a persistent current account deficit and the consequent accumulation of external debt could lead to sterling s exchange rate depreciating materially. That might also be prompted if persistent weakness in the US economy were eventually to lead to a fall in the dollar against the euro. If that happened, there could be strong upward pressures on UK inflation. Against that, it was noted that an abrupt sterling depreciation would cause a one-off rise in the price level, the direct effects of which policy could accommodate; and that the medium-term##NewPara##effect of a depreciation would be to support net trade, which would be helpful given the assumed scenario of persistent world economic weakness. On that view, depending on the relative size of exchange rate depreciation and global economic weakness, interest rates might even have to be reduced. It was also suggested, however, that the path of the exchange rate might be volatile, but with a gradual and cumulatively substantial depreciation. That might present a greater challenge to policy, as it would be less easy to judge at any particular point the extent of the eventual one-off effect on the price level which should be accommodated.##NewPara##The Committee noted that a persistently weak external environment was only one possible scenario, the probability of which was very difficult to judge. Moreover, while the imbalances in the UK economy were uncomfortable, there remained good reasons to expect consumption to weaken as output and income growth slowed, but with uncertainty about how soon it would do so. Some members were, in consequence, more concerned about the immediate and more tangible pressures on the corporate sector.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##The disparity between conditions in the household sector and the corporate sector was apparent in the money and credit data. Annual growth in non-financial corporate sector money holdings had fallen from around % last autumn to % or less in the most recent months. Bank lending had decelerated too, but there was a marked divergence between the manufacturing and service sectors. In the year to Q, the manufacturing sector had made net repayments of bank debt, whereas services sector borrowing from banks had risen over %.##NewPara##For households, the growth rate of both money and borrowing had increased. Household M had risen by nearly % in the year to June, the strongest rate since September . Divisia money growth was about  %, the strongest since  Q. Total borrowing continued to grow at around %.##NewPara##The annual rate of increase in house prices was around % on both the Halifax and Nationwide measures. Mortgage loan approvals were well up on a year ago; and particulars delivered, while still slightly lower than a year ago, had risen sharply in June. The FTSE All Share equity index was just over % lower than at the time of the Committee s July meeting, but well below the level projected in May.##NewPara##Sterling s exchange rate index was about % lower on the month, having fallen against the euro and risen against the dollar.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##In the three months to May, employment had risen by about ,, and at a faster rate than the population of working age. Unemployment had fallen to .% on the Labour Force Survey measure. Inactivity had again increased. Settlements had continued to edge up slightly, to .%. The headline measure of earnings growth was .%, easing back from around % earlier in the year, which had reflected unusually high bonus payments.##NewPara##Taken together with a continuing high number of vacancies, these data suggested that the labour market remained tight. Given the persistent tightness of labour market conditions over the past year or so, it remained surprising that pay and earnings had not risen more. More recently, as pressure on the tradeables sector had intensified, it had been a puzzle that the employment rate had continued to rise. There was anecdotal evidence that, over the past year or so, companies with unsatisfied demand for labour had not bid up wages to recruit, on the grounds that product market conditions would not have allowed them to pass increased costs into prices, but that they were now picking up workers shed by firms in difficulty. It was conceivable that that explained why the pressure on the externally exposed sectors had not yet led to falling employment or rising unemployment. If so, there might be an unsatisfied latent demand for labour which was not showing up in the quantity or price data.   It was   also possible that firms might be holding on to under-utilised labour if they believed that the slowdown would be temporary and wished to avoid the costs of first laying off labour but subsequently having to re-recruit staff with the desired skills.##NewPara##There was, though, some evidence suggesting some easing of labour market conditions.##NewPara##Survey-based measures of recruitment intentions had fallen, and reports of skill shortages had eased somewhat.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##After a sharp rise in May, RPIX inflation had remained at .% in June. Short-term factors   changes in food prices, utility prices, tax duty changes   were likely to make the path of RPIX volatile for a period, while not having material implications overall for the medium-term outlook.##NewPara##Further back in the  pipeline , commodity prices had decelerated. The rate of increase of producer input prices had fallen. Producer output price inflation had also edged down, but was broadly unchanged if the effects of falling tax duties were excluded. Forward-looking surveys suggested weak price pressures. But the magnitude of the impact on RPIX was unclear, as the relationship between producer output prices and retail prices had been less close since the mid-s. In the current conjuncture, an important influence on retail prices would be the strength of consumption. According to surveys, retailers were expecting buoyant sales, so it was possible that there would be some cyclical rise in their margins in the near term, but the projected weakening of consumption built in to the forecast might reasonably be expected to be associated eventually with some moderation of the price pressures from this source.##NewTopic##The August GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections to be published in the##NewPara##On the assumption of an official repo rate of .% over the next two years, the central projection would have been for RPIX inflation to be below the  % target throughout the forecast period.##NewPara##On the alternative assumption of an official repo rate of .% over the next two years, the central projection was for GDP growth to be a little below trend   slightly weaker than in May. The central projection for RPIX inflation edged downwards to around % over the next half year or so, before rising back towards the target towards the end of the two-year forecast period. The path was likely to be volatile given the range of special factors which would affect the twelve-month measure.##NewPara##Some members preferred different assumptions for the central projection for inflation. Some thought that it could be a little higher. Others thought that it could be up to   percentage point lower, reflecting views that the world economy would be weaker, that the world slowdown would have a greater effect on UK inflation, and that there was more spare capacity in the economy than assumed in the published fan chart central projections; these more substantial differences were reflected in the calibrations recorded in Table .B of the Inflation Report.##NewPara##On the best collective judgment of the Committee, the balance of risks to growth was on the downside throughout the forecast period, reflecting in particular the possibilities of a weaker world economic outlook and of a sharper slowdown in private sector final demand in the United Kingdom; and for RPIX inflation, it was slightly on the downside in the second year of the projections. There was, though, a range of views on the balance of risks, with some members placing greater weight on the probability of a significant depreciation in sterling s exchange rate.##NewTopic##Possible tactical considerations##NewPara##The Committee noted that there was a clear expectation, amongst commentators and in financial markets, that the repo rate would be maintained at .% this month, although some expectation had developed in the days leading up to the meeting of further easing in the next few months. An immediate change would, therefore, come as a substantial surprise. It was difficult to know how a cut might affect financial markets, but it would be unwelcome if sterling rose or if longer-term interest rates increased.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##For most members, the outlook for inflation, and the balance of risks, were broadly as published in the Inflation Report fan charts. Given the weaker external environment, and sterling s further appreciation against the euro since the May Report, net trade was set to continue to be a drag on output growth. Faced with softening external demand, widespread weakness in ICT-related sectors, heightened uncertainty about the global outlook, and pressure on the profitability and financial position of parts of the corporate sector, UK business investment spending was likely to be subdued for a while. The outlook for household consumption was less clear. On the one hand, it was likely to be restrained by past falls in equity prices, and by prospective lower labour income growth as the economy slowed. On the other hand, growth in retail sales and in household sector money and borrowing all remained robust, consumer confidence was firm, and the housing market was strong. For these members, the imbalances in the economy presented a dilemma for policy and the immediate choice was finely balanced between maintaining the Bank s repo rate at .% and a reduction of  basis points.##NewPara##Various arguments   given different weights by different members   were advanced for maintaining rates at .%. First, against the Committee s previous expectations, there were still few if any signs of consumption growth weakening. The labour market remained tight, and the pressures##NewPara##on the corporate sector had yet to feed through to employment and unemployment, which if and when it happened would dampen household confidence and spending. Given that an immediate repo rate cut would not do much to alleviate the pressures on the corporate sector from abroad, there was advantage in waiting a month or two to see whether labour market conditions were easing and consumption was indeed starting to slow. Second, an immediate cut would exacerbate the imbalances in the economy, by further stimulating consumption in circumstances where the housing market was already buoyant and household confidence was robust. A cut in mortgage rates would tend to fuel this. There was, therefore, a risk of increasing the size of the adjustment that would ultimately be necessary, possibly leading to larger deviations of inflation from the target and undesirable volatility in output. Third and associated with the imbalances, there was a perceptible risk that sterling could fall, triggered for example by deteriorating world conditions, by a reappraisal of the sustainability of persistent trade deficits or by domestic adjustment as UK households tried to strengthen their balance sheets. The timing of any such fall was, of course, highly uncertain. But it would tend to increase inflation. As well as any one-off effect on the price level and the consequences for net trade, a depreciation might well also   given current conditions in the labour market   put upward pressure on nominal earnings as the consequent rise in the sterling price of imports would reduce the purchasing power of households  real incomes. Fourth, the full impact of the earlier easing of monetary policy was still to come through, and the planned rapid rise in government spending was now well underway. Both would help to underpin domestic demand over the next year or so, and so a further boost from another repo rate cut was not necessary now. Fifth, although the prospects for the world economy had weakened, the course of events in the US economy, which was the most important influence on global activity, was not inconsistent with some recovery in growth towards the end of the year and into the early part of . Sixth, the data on the month did not make a sufficient case for surprising financial markets.##NewPara##There was a risk that financial markets would overreact to a surprise cut, with a generalised fall in money market rates and so a greater-than-planned easing in monetary conditions. It might also conceivably lead, perversely, to a strengthening of the exchange rate if the markets concluded that the Committee was more committed to sustaining output growth than previously thought, particularly given market uncertainties about the policies of other central banks. Seventh, if rates were maintained at .%, the central projection for inflation in the Inflation Report would be below the  % target for the forecast period, which would imply the likelihood of an interest rate reduction later in the year.##NewPara##That would itself probably lead to lower short-term money market rates and so to easier monetary conditions, without the Committee so actively bolstering consumption.##NewPara##Various arguments   again given different weights by different members   were advanced for an immediate reduction of  basis points. First, the central projection for inflation, based on an assumption of unchanged interest rates of .%, was below target for the whole of the two-year forecast period. That being so, and since there was not much prospect of significant news about consumption or the labour market in the next month or two, there was little advantage to waiting before easing policy. Second, the risks to output   and, in the view of most members, to inflation   were on the downside, given the direct and indirect effects on net trade of the inhospitable international environment, which recent surveys suggested might now be spreading to the services sector. That would put further downward pressures on inflation. An immediate reduction in the repo rate would, therefore, provide a degree of insurance against a further deterioration in the outlook.##NewPara##Third, the pressures on the corporate sector represented a greater risk to the outlook than the apparently buoyant conditions in the household sector. In both manufacturing and services, some firms were capable of switching production from external to domestic markets. But domestic demand needed to be sustained to support these sectors. Otherwise, output growth might be weaker than in the central projection, with inflation undershooting the target. Fourth, while some of the indicators of consumption currently remained strong, the most likely outlook remained for consumption growth to slow. Given weak net trade and investment, it was therefore appropriate to provide some further support for consumption by cutting interest rates, in order to maintain aggregate demand in line with the economy s supply capacity. Fifth, even if consumption did not slow, the risks to household sector balance sheets would not be material in the near term. While household debt had risen relative to income over the past few years, neither income gearing nor debt relative to household wealth appeared exceptional by historical standards. While the housing market was strong, it was nowhere near as strong as in the boom conditions of the mid-s or the late-s. The possibility of consumption growth not falling back soon would not, therefore, create unacceptable risks. Sixth, if   against expectations   domestic demand were to remain strong or the international economy were to recover more quickly than anticipated, policy could be re-tightened. That would be easier to justify after the event than not easing now but having to do so later in the face of weakening in demand and output accompanied by an undershoot of the inflation target. Seventh, if sterling were to fall on account of accumulating economic imbalances, policy would probably be easier rather than harder to operate in the medium-term, so concerns about the imbalances on that score should not stand in the way of a further cut in interest rates now.##NewPara##For some other members, in addition to the reasons set out the previous paragraph, the news on the month had been sufficiently on the downside, both internationally and domestically, to raise the##NewPara##question of whether an interest rate cut of more than  basis points was merited. In the US, the National Association of Purchasing Managers survey   especially for new orders   had fallen back; and the revised GDP data implied somewhat weaker trend growth. In continental Europe, the deterioration in confidence and in indicators of new orders was worrying. Japan and several other Asian countries were being badly hit by the global ICT sector problems. Emerging market bond yield spreads had widened and global equity prices were lower. The international outlook was therefore gloomy. Domestically, the CIPS services survey had been surprisingly weak. It seemed that services sector output might be even weaker in Q than in Q. Weakness in the corporate sector was likely to feed through to the household sector. The outlook for inflation was materially weaker than presented in the published fan chart. As reflected in Table .B of the Inflation Report, different preferred assumptions could reduce the central projection for inflation two years ahead by about . percentage points, to a little below %. The balance of risks was also on the downside. That being so, the immediate policy choice was between a cut of  or of  basis points. Pre-emption pointed towards a  basis point cut immediately. It was unlikely that sterling would perversely strengthen if interest rates were cut. However, a large cut would be especially surprising and would entail an unnecessary risk of further stimulating the housing market. In any case, at a time of increased uncertainty, a gradualist strategy might be preferable. On balance, the better immediate course was a  basis point cut.##NewPara##The Governor invited the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be reduced by  basis points to .%. Six members of the Committee (the Governor,##NewPara##Christopher Allsopp, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Stephen Nickell and Sushil Wadhwani) voted for the proposition. Mervyn King, David Clementi and Ian Plenderleith voted against, preferring to maintain the repo rate at .%.