Prices and costs##NewPara##RPIX inflation had fallen to .% in August, largely reflecting falls in the contribution of petrol prices but also a fall in seasonal food prices:  by contrast with recent years, such prices had risen in July but fallen back in August.  The near-term outlook for petrol prices and for petrol retailers  margins suggested a rather lower path for inflation over the next few months than had been expected at the time of the projections made for the August Inflation Report. Were margins to be restored, and the normal relationship between oil prices and petrol prices to apply, the recent fall in RPIX inflation might be reversed. But the timing of any such restoration of margins was unclear. The latest ONS advance estimate of RPIX inflation, which was again available for the Committee s meeting, suggested that August s fall had been reversed, although no information was yet available on what accounted for this.##NewPara##The range of measures of domestically generated inflation available to the Committee were for the first time all at or below the inflation target of .%: RPIX inflation excluding import prices stood at .%; the GDP deflator excluding export prices at .%; and the growth of unit labour costs, adjusted for trend and using actual labour productivity growth, stood at .% and .% respectively - though both reflected lower bonuses, which might not persist. Contrary to expectations at the time of the previous meeting, the GDP deflator had not been revised upwards.##NewPara##There were some indications however that inflation expectations had increased, notably in the results of the most recent Basix surveys of the general public and of trades unions whose expectations of inflation had increased by - basis points since the second quarter. Looking twelve months ahead, inflation expectations of the general public (which had always remained well above the Government s target of .%) now stood at .% and those of trades unions at##NewPara##.%. The extent to which this was a temporary effect, reflecting a reaction to the disruption of petrol supplies in the first half of September, was unclear. Other surveys of inflation expectations suggested little change. But it would be worrying, particularly in the context of the apparent tightness in the labour market, if this increase in inflation expectations were to persist as it could then affect wage bargaining in the coming settlement round.##NewTopic##The world economy##NewPara##Oil prices had fallen $ since the Committee s previous meeting, with the Brent one month future now just above $ per barrel. Oil price futures were indicating a fall in prices to about $ per barrel by the end of , substantially above the projection in the August Inflation Report. It was unclear whether the factors determining the long-run level of the oil price had changed significantly, but the futures curve did at least suggest that the market s view of the horizon over which the price would return to more normal levels had lengthened in recent months.##NewPara##Against this background, the Committee first reviewed the evidence on the likely source of the shock which had resulted in the sharp increase in the price of oil since the end of . Most members felt that the initial shock could largely be attributed to the unexpectedly strong growth of the world economy, in particular the rapid recovery of the Asian economies from the difficulties they had experienced in the second half of . This had subsequently been reinforced by OPEC restraint on supply. Other commodity prices had been slower to respond, but were now beginning to do so. The OPEC countries had recently shown themselves willing to increase their supply of oil, which - together with the release of oil from the US strategic stockpile - had helped to stabilise the market but at a relatively high nominal price level.##NewPara##Looking forward, the price path implied by the futures curve would reflect the market consensus on the outlook for demand, for non-OPEC supply and for the ability of the OPEC countries to sustain the cohesion which would be required to stabilise prices at around their chosen target range. It continued to represent a plausible central case. But it was recognised by the Committee that there were risks around this path. In particular, there was felt by some members to be an upside risk in the coming months as the Northern Hemisphere winter##NewPara##approached and downside risks further out - associated either with the build-up of non-OPEC supply or with a more rapid slowdown in world demand than was currently foreseen.##NewPara##Though the experience of previous oil supply shocks was unlikely to be repeated, it was possible that further sharp movements in the price of oil could lie ahead. On this view, it could be a year or more before the non-OPEC supply response would begin to have a marked effect in restoring oil prices to more normal levels. In the meantime, prices could fluctuate quite sharply and this volatility could dampen world activity by denting confidence.##NewPara##The Committee noted that the UK was better placed than some other countries to allow monetary policy to accommodate the first round effects of any supply-related shock to oil prices, with the economy currently operating at close to capacity and with inflation somewhat below target. In addition, in contrast to most OECD countries, the UK s position as a net oil exporter meant that the balance of payments and fiscal effects of an oil price rise were likely to be positive.##NewPara##The consensus of outside forecasters was that the increases in the price of oil since the spring would reduce world activity by about half a percent. This was a somewhat more muted effect than had followed similar price movements in the past, reflecting reductions in the intensity of oil use since earlier shocks and the fact that the real price of oil remained significantly below previous peaks. In any case, some slowing of the world economy had been expected, and indications that it was now occurring simply confirmed those expectations. In addition, it was possible now that the OPEC countries would spend more of the extra income generated by the higher oil prices, because of changes in their financial positions. This would provide a larger offsetting boost to world export growth than had previously been the case.##NewPara##Some members of the Committee, however, assessed the recent news as pointing to a risk of a sharper slowdown in world growth than had seemed likely at the time of the previous meeting. Market expectations for interest rates in the G countries had fallen over the past month, and the OECD leading indicator had now been falling since January. Imbalances in the world economy persisted and might be increasing. The benign forecasts for the world outlook were predicated on a soft landing in the US together with stronger activity growth in Europe.##NewPara##There were some indications that that outturn might not be realised, with signs of slowdown in both the euro area and the United States. Second quarter growth in the euro area had been .%, rather lower than was projected at the time of the August Inflation Report. Retail sales data and confidence surveys suggested that growth in the euro area might have slowed significantly in the third quarter. In contrast, activity had been stronger in the United States. The risks to the world outlook might on balance therefore have increased. Higher oil prices might depress consumer and investment spending. The marked falls in equity prices over the month could be an early indication of further slowdown in prospect. The possibility of further sharp movements in oil prices suggested that confidence could weaken and could lead to delays in planned investment. These risks would need to be examined in the context of the forecast for the November Inflation Report.##NewTopic##Monetary and financial conditions##NewPara##Monetary data continued to show strong growth. Annual growth in notes and coin had increased by . percentage points to .% in September, though perhaps a third of this increase reflected banks  precautionary build-up of cash holdings at the time of the disruption to fuel supplies. M growth in August had increased to .%, its highest rate for two years, affected in part by transactions related to G telecommunications licences and to Lloyds TSB s takeover of Scottish Widows. Aggregate Divisia money growth was rising steadily and now stood at just under %. Total credit growth, at %, was the strongest since  and though household M growth had eased a little it remained at levels last seen a decade ago. Secured lending to households had returned to the level established in the middle of , reversing the dip in July. Mortgage equity withdrawal had been positive for two quarters and was expected to continue to support consumption in the coming months. Recent rapid growth in the level of corporate borrowing seemed to be related principally to the financing of merger and acquisition activity and to the purchase of G telecommunications licences, so was not inconsistent with the rather weak outturns for business investment growth in recent quarters. The overall picture was therefore somewhat stronger than a month ago, but remained broadly consistent with expectations at the time of the August Inflation Report.##NewPara##Equity prices had fallen by about % over the month, across a range of countries, but the reasons for this were not entirely clear. In the UK, it was possible that part of the fall was related to the increase in longer term interest rates. But that was not the case in other countries which had experienced a similar fall in equity prices. Profit warnings, especially in the high- technology sectors, had increased. To some, the common factor was the recognition by these markets of the possibility of a sharper slowdown in the world economy than had previously been expected. The interaction between the oil price and the equities market was important and the market could recover if the oil price remained stable. But any further rise in the price of oil could precipitate a loss of confidence and prompt a sharp fall in equity prices.##NewPara##Sterling s effective exchange rate was nearly % above the level assumed at the time of the August Inflation Report and a little over % above its level at the time of the Committee s previous meeting. Against this background, the Committee discussed recent developments in the foreign exchange markets. One explanation of the strength of the US dollar was that it reflected the pressure of capital flows. These, it was argued, were taking place in response to beneficial supply side developments in the US economy and the profitable investment opportunities they had created. On this view, the strong dollar exchange rate and the US current account deficit were necessary counterparts of the capital inflows and could be sustained until those profitable opportunities were exhausted. There was as yet little evidence to suggest any slowing in this process of the reallocation of capital, which some on the Committee felt gave greater credence to the view that a sustained period of faster US growth could be expected. Others however suggested that even quite small changes in expected productivity growth could have large effects both on equity prices and on capital flows, so were less confident that the dollar would remain strong. While such effects might indeed account for the US dollar s strength against the euro, they were less convincing as an explanation of the weakness of the euro against sterling or the yen. It therefore remained difficult to find a satisfactory explanation of the current constellation of exchange rates.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The Committee had assumed in its projections in the August Inflation Report that consumer spending growth would begin to slow, as households began to rebuild their balance##NewPara##sheets and savings returned to a more normal level in relation to income and wealth. This would be necessary if government expenditure was to increase in line with the plans outlined in the March Budget and the Chancellor s subsequent Spending Review, without putting undue pressure on the supply capacity of the economy.  So the evolution of the balance between private sector demand and government spending was a key issue for the inflationary outlook.##NewPara##The news over the month suggested that the domestic demand picture remained broadly in line with this projection. The National Accounts data for the second quarter confirmed earlier estimates of quarterly GDP growth at .%, though the level of GDP in  had been revised up by . percentage point. Government spending in the second quarter was rather stronger than previously estimated, but fiscal outturns were so far in line with the Government s budget projections. The net trade position was a little weaker. None of this represented a significant change to the overall picture.##NewPara##More recent indicators were mixed. Equity prices in the UK had fallen by % on the month and there had been sharp falls in consumer confidence - probably associated with the disruption to petrol supplies. The MORI survey showed that consumer confidence had fallen by  points between August and September, which was consistent with the tick down shown by the most recent GfK survey. Retail sales volumes had grown .% in August, somewhat faster than had been expected, but house prices had now been broadly flat for six months. Provisional results from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors  survey of estate agents in September indicated that there would be no change in the balance reporting house price increases over the previous three months, though the balance for London had recovered sharply.##NewPara##The survey evidence on activity was generally weaker: the CBI Distributive Trades survey showed further weakness in motor traders  reported sales in September (though wholesalers  sales were the highest since February ); surveys from the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply showed weaker output growth in manufacturing and in services, but stronger in construction; and the CBI/PricewaterhouseCoopers survey of financial services suggested that activity in that sector was growing at its slowest rate since December .##NewPara##The disruption to petrol supplies had plainly affected the surveys and would also affect official statistics in both the third and fourth quarters. Its direct effects were, however, hard to gauge. Staff estimates suggested that output in the third quarter might be as much as . percentage points lower as a result of the disruption, but that the effect on the third and fourth quarters together was likely to be minimal. These estimates were essentially judgmental: there were as yet no hard data. Some of the demand effects - for example, journeys and leisure activities forgone - might represent a permanent loss of output in those sectors, but the expenditure might simply have been switched to other goods; and there would be offsets in stockbuilding. The Bank s regional Agents reported that the disruption had had little impact on their manufacturing contacts, but that some retailers and leisure businesses had experienced a significant loss of trade which was unlikely to be recovered.##NewPara##Looking further ahead, the disruption might nevertheless have more persistent effects on both business and consumer confidence. It was possible for example that there might be permanent effects on stock-holding levels, if businesses were to review their delivery strategies in the light of the disruption that had occurred (or might have done, had the shortages of fuel continued). Firms might be less willing to rely on  just in time  delivery arrangements, leading to increased stock holding throughout the supply chain, or might wish to maintain larger stocks of fuel. There was also anecdotal evidence pointing to hesitancy over investment plans. So while the data seemed a little weaker overall, it was difficult to separate the effects of the petrol supply disruption itself and its effects on confidence from the underlying trend.##NewPara##The updated staff central estimate, ahead of the Committee s meeting, had been for output growth in the third quarter of around .%, in line with the forecast in the August Inflation Report. The available information on expenditure suggested that the risks were on the downside. However, the Index of Production for August, which was available to the Committee, showed production growth of .% in August and included upward revisions of . percentage points to the index for July. Manufacturing growth of .% in August was also stronger than had been expected, with very strong growth in the output of electrical and optical equipment (which included output of mobile phones and related infrastructure goods). This stronger industrial production would by itself probably add . percentage points to the estimate for output growth in the third quarter, putting it somewhat above the Inflation Report projection,##NewPara##though the effects of the disruption to petrol supplies could more than offset this.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Particular uncertainties surrounded the current conjuncture in the labour market. The continuing steady growth in employment, together with lower levels of claimant unemployment than had been seen since the s, suggested that the market remained tight. Earnings growth on the other hand had fallen back sharply from its peak early in the year. It was unclear how  long this benign conjunction of strong quantities and modest earnings growth could continue.##NewPara##Employment growth had slowed a little in the three months to July, with the Labour Force Survey (LFS) measure up .% compared with .% in the three months to April. Average  hours worked had increased by .% over the same period. But LFS unemployment was down sharply, and by more than the increase in employment, lowering the unemployment rate by . percentage points to .%. Inactivity had increased somewhat in each of the last two LFS data releases. Reports from the Bank s regional Agents did not suggest that there had been any further tightening in the market, though shortages persisted and the recent fall in unemployment had drawn particularly on the pool of short-term unemployed. It was noted that the Workforce Jobs measure of employment suggested rather slower employment growth over the first half of the year than the LFS measure along with more rapid growth in inactivity.##NewPara##While quantities remained tight, the rate of growth of pay continued to be slower than expected. The Average Earnings Index (AEI) again showed a fall in the annual growth of earnings on the three-month headline basis, from .% to .%, while annual growth was unchanged on the month at .% in July. Earnings growth in each of the last three months had included a substantial negative contribution from bonuses. These AEI data contrasted to some extent with those on rates of pay for agency staff, with Recruitment and Employment Confederation data for September showing further sharp increases in permanent salaries and rates for temporary staff, though they were now consistent with the rate of pay growth as measured by the Reward index. The Bank s regional Agents reported little evidence of increasing pay pressures and suggested that signs earlier in the year of imminent difficulties in pay negotiations had not materialised. So the dichotomy between strong quantities and weak##NewPara##The Committee discussed how long this benign combination of steady and quite rapid employment growth with subdued earnings growth could continue. Some members felt that this welcome development could persist. Overall earnings growth as measured by the AEI had been slowing for five months, regular pay was growing at a steady rate and settlements were steady or falling over the past year taken as a whole.  The recent negative contributions from bonuses were not surprising. In financial services, tougher performance targets were likely to have been set for this year than for , when the outlook had seemed less promising; and recent bonus outturns were consistent with the weak performance of the retail sector. To the extent that millennium-related payments had contributed to the sharp movements in earnings growth at the start of this year, temporarily inflating the level of pay, earnings growth in the coming months would be correspondingly reduced. Labour productivity per head was growing at around trend rates, and productivity per hour comfortably above it. The rate of growth of unit labour costs was slower than for several years. It was noted that the projection in the August Inflation##NewPara##Report envisaged higher levels of earnings growth in the coming months, which now seemed less likely.##NewPara##Other members were less sanguine, finding it harder to reconcile the earnings data with other information on the labour market which to them pointed to the possibility of intensifying pay pressures in the months ahead. It was suggested that the low pay settlements earlier in the year had reflected the very low outturns for the RPI in the months leading up to this year s main settlement round and that, since then, the average level of settlements had climbed steadily month by month. The short-term outlook for the RPI suggested that circumstances would be rather different for next year s main pay round. The slowing in the growth of unit labour costs  was substantially driven by recent weak bonus outturns, which were unlikely to persist. It was important to remain alert for the first signs of emerging wage pressures and it was in this context that the recent uptick in inflation expectations would - if it was confirmed as more than a temporary reaction to the uncertainties surrounding fuel supplies - be a particular cause for concern.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Once again, there had been little decisive news over the month to alter the Committee s view on the underlying path of the UK economy. The projections in the August Inflation Report remained broadly intact, though the pace of earnings growth continued to be surprisingly modest given the rate of growth of employment and the pace at which unemployment was falling. Oil prices had eased in the past month and sterling had strengthened somewhat, but both were higher than expected at the time of the August projections. Nonetheless, the news on the month was on balance a little weaker. Despite the slightly stronger monetary, retail sales and index of production data, as well as the sharp fall in unemployment and the tick up in inflation expectations, equity prices had fallen significantly, earnings growth remained subdued, the survey evidence (including evidence on confidence) was on balance weaker and the RPIX inflation outturn was lower than had been expected at the time of the previous meeting.##NewPara##On one view, while there remained arguments for an increase in the repo rate at some point these were not decisive. GDP was if anything growing a little more strongly than had been expected, though there were some signs that the growth of private demand was beginning to ease. This was necessary if the announced plans to increase government consumption and investment were not to place undue pressure on the productive capacity of the economy. Exports were remarkably buoyant, reflecting the strength of the world economy. Measures of domestically generated inflation were easing, but the downward external influences on UK inflation were now almost exhausted. The external factors which had allowed real wages to grow rapidly at a time of moderate growth in nominal earnings could not continue indefinitely. The evidence on labour shortages was mixed, but the market remained tight and it was unclear how long the benign outturns on earnings growth could continue. While the Bank s regional Agents reported few signs of increasing pay pressure and previous indications that wage negotiations might be becoming more difficult had not materialised, wage settlements had picked up in recent months. Unemployment was falling sharply, particularly amongst the short- term unemployed, and this could not persist without putting upward pressure on wages. Signs that inflation expectations amongst the general public and wage negotiators had increased were worrying and reinforced the view that upward pressure on wages was a substantial risk to the##NewPara##inflation outlook. Labour market conditions would need to be monitored very carefully for early##NewPara##signs of inflationary pressure. Nevertheless, the weaker indicators in the past month were perhaps more forward-looking than the stronger.  It remained to be seen whether the weakness in the activity surveys and the tick up in inflation expectations simply reflected a temporary lowering of confidence associated with the disruption to petrol supplies, or were indicative of an underlying weakening in sentiment which would persist. Another month s data would help to resolve this issue, and would cast further light on the puzzling behaviour of the labour market.##NewPara##Further information on the Government s fiscal plans would also probably become available in the pre-Budget Report. On balance therefore, and given also that any change in the repo rate this month would surprise the markets and put further upward pressure on a sterling exchange rate already nearly % higher than in the August Inflation Report projection, it was right to wait for some of these uncertainties to be resolved.##NewPara##On another view, there was felt to be no case for a rise in interest rates now. The labour market picture was more encouraging, even though the recent negative contribution from bonuses was not expected to persist. More significant was the rate of growth of regular pay, which was not on this view inconsistent with current levels of tightness and with continued steady growth of employment. Recent outturns in earnings growth had been well below the projection in the August Inflation Report and the surge in pay growth associated with the millennium would not be repeated. The labour market did of course represent a risk to the outlook, but it had been tight - without generating inflationary pressures - for sufficiently long that it was better to react when there was clear evidence that those risks were beginning to materialise than to act against them on the basis only of a forecast. More important, on this view, was whether the pace of productivity growth would remain above its historical trend. The fact that the various measures of domestically generated inflation were at or below the inflation target was also helpful as it suggested less risk of breaching the target if the exchange rate were to fall. In addition, the current stance of policy was already slightly contractionary on the basis of estimates of the neutral level of interest rates. Dynamic monetary conditions indices suggested also that the past and current levels of sterling and of interest rates would continue to provide tightening monetary conditions for up to two years. A more substantial uncertainty on this second view was the outlook for the oil market and for the world economy. The prospects for a soft landing in the US and for stronger growth in the euro area, the basis for the projected gentle slowdown in world growth, had reduced and were the main risks to the UK inflation##NewPara##outlook. It seemed more likely that instability in the oil market could persist and could be associated with equity market weakness. The euro area remained vulnerable to a further oil shock, with more fragile demand and greater current inflationary pressures than were faced in the UK. Though the UK economy was well-placed to weather a further shock, confidence had already been shaken here too. So the downside risk was larger than it had been a month ago.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.