The world economy##NewPara##Over the month since the July MPC meeting, there had been further substantial falls in equity prices around the world. In domestic currency terms, the Wilshire index had fallen %, the Dow Jones Eurostoxx index %, the Topix index  % and the FTSE All-Share index %. Major indices (apart from Japan s) were some % below the average levels used as a starting point in the May Inflation Report; and some of the  high tech  indices were % or so lower. Indices had been more volatile, too, and uncertainty about future prices had risen, judging by the expected volatility implied by options prices.##NewPara##According to the first estimate of US GDP in  Q, the quarterly growth rate was .%, slightly lower than expected. The growth rate of private investment, at .%, although modest, was the first positive figure in seven quarters, and suggested that the divergence between consumption and investment growth might be narrowing a little. Substantial revisions to past data meant that GDP growth was now estimated to have fallen in the first three quarters of , not just in the third quarter, and the estimated level of GDP in  Q had been revised down by .%. As a result, the implied growth rate of productivity in  was now significantly lower. Both consumption and investment were affected by the revisions, but the revision to the estimate of firms  spending on computers   a reduction of %   was particularly marked. Any  capital overhang  from excessive investment in ICT was consequently likely to be less than previously thought, so the prospects for investment might to that extent have improved. Forward-looking indicators in July, however, suggested some deterioration in the economic outlook. For example, the Conference Board measure of consumer confidence had fallen to ., from . in June, and the Michigan measure to ., from . in the previous month   for both measures, the second monthly fall in a row. While these data pointed to a more gradual and subdued recovery, it was important to remember that some##NewPara##slowing from the sharply higher rate of GDP growth in  Q, now estimated to have been .%, had been expected, given the one-off boost in that quarter from the turnaround in the inventory cycle.##NewPara##News from the euro area was not reassuring about the robustness of the recovery there. There had been signs that activity had been lower than previously suggested by surveys, and now those forward-looking indicators were weakening too. Based on April and May data, it seemed likely that euro-area industrial production had fallen slightly in  Q, after rising .% in Q. Both consumer and industrial confidence in the euro area had fallen in June (the latest month for which comprehensive data were available). German, French, Italian and Belgian industrial confidence had fallen in July. Moreover, the outlook for external demand was likely to have deteriorated because of the rise in the euro s effective exchange rate during the second quarter. One factor behind the particular weakness of output in Germany might have been relatively high costs and output prices; if that were the case, activity might continue to be relatively weak while the German price level fell relative to the levels in other countries, including those in the euro area, leading to a depreciation of Germany s real exchange rate. But German labour costs had always been relatively high, and that had not prevented net external demand making an important contribution to German growth.##NewPara##Against this background, the Committee discussed the probable causes and implications of the falls in equity prices. The news about real economic activity since the May Inflation Report had perhaps suggested that the global recovery was marginally less robust than previously expected, but that did not seem to be sufficient to explain the size of the equity price adjustments. It was puzzling now that the falls had been relatively uniform across most industrial countries, just as it had been puzzling that equity prices outside the United States had increased as much as they had in the second half of the s, given the relative rates of productivity growth. In the United States, the continuing debate about corporate governance, the reliability of corporate accounts and events such as WorldCom s filing for protection under Chapter  on  July might have led to a view that the outlook for corporate profitability was weaker than previously priced into the equity market. The increase in the implied volatility of share prices suggested that uncertainty about corporate earnings had increased, and that would have reinforced the impact on those prices of any adverse shock to the outlook for profits. It was difficult to identify comparable factors affecting profit expectations outside the United States, so the size of the equity price falls elsewhere was perhaps surprising. Conventional valuation methods suggested that, even allowing for factors that might have increased equilibrium price-earnings ratios, equity prices in the United States might still embody unduly##NewPara##optimistic expectations of corporate earnings growth. Nevertheless, over the week before the MPC meeting, the US market had proved quite resilient to disappointing data releases (such as the##NewPara##Q US GDP numbers), and market movements had been less correlated with the dollar, perhaps suggesting that domestic and foreign investors might have become more confident about valuation levels recently. It was also notable that US markets had reacted favourably to the signing into law on  July of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, designed to protect investors by improving the accuracy and reliability of corporate disclosures, and addressing many of the perceived corporate malpractices recently in the public eye.##NewPara##Given the uncertainty about why equity markets had fallen, it was difficult to estimate the    likely impact of these falls on economic activity.  But in broad terms, they were likely to depress both investment, by increasing the cost of capital, and consumption, by reducing household wealth. The impact on consumption was likely to differ across households, depending on the level and composition of their financial wealth. Direct holders of equities were likely to see a clear and immediate change in their wealth. The impact on households whose exposures to equities were less direct, for example through pension funds and life insurance, was likely to be slower and less certain, to an extent that would depend on the nature of the saving products held. It could reinforce other factors, such as increasing life expectancy, that might encourage people to save more. But it was noted that long-standing projections of increased funding problems for state pension schemes in several countries, which might also have been expected to stimulate higher saving, appeared to have had little effect on consumers  behaviour.##NewPara##The deterioration in the prospects for some Latin American countries  finances did not appear to have had a substantial effect on international financial markets over the past month. Argentina s problems had not been resolved, Brazilian sovereign debt spreads had increased sharply, and there had been pressure on the Uruguayan banking system from deposit withdrawals. But investors still did not seem to regard these difficulties as symptomatic of a broader problem; unlike in -, there was no sign yet that this might trigger a generalised reduction in appetite for emerging-market assets, or for risky assets generally. Recent developments in Latin America were unlikely to have a significant impact on the US recovery; and in contrast, the Canadian economy, which was more important for US trade, was performing better than expected.##NewPara##The economic recovery in non-Japan Asia remained strong, although it was likely to be particularly dependent on future US developments. There was little reason to change the Committee s judgment that the short-term prospects for Japan remained subdued.##NewTopic##Money, credit and the exchange rate##NewPara##The UK monetary data over the past month were consistent with continuing robust economic growth.  Household M borrowing had stayed strong, growing at an annual rate of .% in June, but had not materially accelerated further. On the corporate side, the divergence between the borrowing behaviour of the manufacturing and the non-financial services sectors had widened over the past year, with the former, in aggregate, repaying sterling bank loans at a faster rate in recent quarters, while the latter continued to be net borrowers. Committee members thought it unlikely that this reflected any change in the relative willingness of banks to supply finance to manufacturing.##NewPara##The net repayment of loans might suggest that manufacturers still saw few opportunities for profitable investment; rates of return in manufacturing remained much lower on average than in services, and indeed new estimates of manufacturing profitability had revealed that it had been lower than previously thought. Another possibility was that some manufacturers might have been substituting funds borrowed on the capital markets (including in foreign currencies) for bank loans, for example, to help finance investment overseas.##NewPara##Sterling had appreciated by  % in effective terms over the past month, and was now at a level similar to the  working-day average used as a starting point in the May Inflation Report. The appreciation had taken place at a time when bilateral rates between the dollar, euro and yen had been relatively stable (in contrast to May and June). In principle, it could have reflected an increase in the attractiveness of investing in the production of tradable services in the United Kingdom relative to elsewhere, but there was little evidence to corroborate that hypothesis at the moment. Anecdote in the foreign exchange market suggested that, to many market participants, the economic performance of the United Kingdom appeared relatively stronger, partly as a result of the strong preliminary estimate for the growth of GDP in  Q, and there was more confidence about the UK authorities  likely policy responses to economic shocks. However, if that were the case, it was puzzling that the performance of the UK stock market had not also been better.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##According to the ONS  first estimate, GDP in  Q grew by .% over the previous quarter. That broadly confirmed earlier signals from surveys of a pick-up in growth. But the special factors of the Jubilee long weekend, the World Cup, and the movement of a Bank Holiday from May to June made it difficult to assess the underlying pattern of demand and output; as well as the arithmetic impact of changes in the number of working days, there may have been temporary changes in firms  and households  behaviour. At a sectoral level, manufacturing output had been a little higher than expected in April and May;  but the growth of services output had been a little lower than expected in Q as a whole. The most recent CIPS survey evidence, for July, suggested that new orders in manufacturing were falling and output was flat, but that services output and new business were continuing to grow. The Bank s regional Agents  contacts had reported a gradual, but patchy, recovery in manufacturing.##NewPara##The Bank s Agents had reported that investment intentions had stalled recently but had not so far been significantly affected by the earlier falls in equity markets. Consumption growth appeared to have picked up in Q. There were some signs from the June retail sales figures and the latest CBI distributive trades survey that it might have eased a little around the end of the quarter, but consumer confidence on the GfK measure was little changed in July after seasonal adjustment, and household borrowing growth had hardly slackened. The Agents  contacts suggested that consumption remained fairly firm, with some signs of a rebound in July from a weaker June.  The recently announced details of the Government s public spending plans, in the Comprehensive Spending Review, did not materially change the fiscal outlook.##NewPara##The drop in equity prices already experienced was likely to affect investment and consumption. Consumers might save more to attempt to restore their financial wealth, including the value of prospective pensions. In the case of corporate defined-benefit pension schemes, the wealth effect would be borne by the shareholders of the sponsoring firms rather than by the scheme members; but it might take some time for the implications of equity market developments to become clear to those shareholders. The implementation of accounting standard FRS in the United Kingdom was making any funding shortfalls more visible. The possibility of increased precautionary saving as a result of doubts about the permanence of existing pension scheme arrangements on the part of scheme members was a downside risk to consumption. In the United States, a similar proportion of##NewPara##pension scheme assets was held in defined-contribution plans as in defined-benefit schemes, a much higher share than in the United Kingdom, where defined-benefit schemes still dominated the pension component of household financial wealth; in continental Europe, assets in private pension schemes of either sort tended to be much lower. That was one of the factors pointing to the likelihood of a bigger impact of the equity price falls on consumption in the short run in the United States than elsewhere. The financial wealth of consumers in the United Kingdom, compared with much of the rest of Europe, was probably more sensitive to the price falls, because of the greater exposure to equities through with-profits life insurance policies (including those embodied in endowment mortgages) and equity mutual funds. The Committee expected only a modest rise in the UK saving ratio, but acknowledged that recent asset price developments had increased the uncertainty about this projection.##NewPara##One factor continuing to bolster consumption was the strength of the housing market. The latest house price data from both the Nationwide and Halifax showed an acceleration over the past three months; both now pointed to an annual rate of increase of over %. Looking forward, however, Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors  data on new buyer enquiries and house price expectations and a special survey by the Bank s regional Agents suggested that more people were expecting the market to slow in the second half of the year. Demand in the buy-to-let market  appeared to be weakening, although the summer holiday season could have been at least partly responsible, and some indicators of housing market activity, such as particulars delivered, had fallen. This was consistent with what would be expected if the demand for housing had started to decelerate. But mortgage approvals were still running at a high rate, after allowing for the number of working days in June, and this apparent slowdown in housing market activity could prove short-lived, as had some pauses in the past.##NewPara##The Committee reviewed the question of whether or not the current level of house prices was unsustainable. There were several reasons why the ratio of house prices to earnings might now be higher in the long run. First, in an environment of lower inflation, the real value of initial mortgage payments for first-time buyers was lower for any given term and interest rate (less  front loading  of mortgage payments), making housing more affordable for liquidity-constrained households. Second, the supply of houses had fallen relative to the number of households.  And, third, continuing financial liberalisation and competition had relaxed quantitative limits on mortgage lending.##NewPara##Overall, the prospect continued to be for a modest strengthening of aggregate demand. But the falls in equity markets around the world were likely to bring about lower growth in both investment and consumption than expected in May and constituted a source of significant uncertainty about the outlook.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##There was little news on the month to suggest that labour market pressures had changed significantly. On the LFS measure, unemployment stood at .% in May, and had been broadly flat for some time. Regular pay growth had been .% in the year to May, much the same as in April. Looking forward, it was likely that the large wedge between the growth rates of the consumption wage   average earnings compared with the tax and price index (TPI)   and the product wage   employers  wage costs compared with the GDP deflator   would diminish. Import prices were expected to edge up a little faster and the planned National Insurance increases would lead to an increase in the tax element of the TPI. Indeed, TPI inflation, which had been negative for several months, had picked up and, since April, had been close to the rate of increase of the RPI. The expected slowdown in the growth of the consumption wage was consistent with the outlook for slower consumption growth. It might also increase upward pressure on nominal wages in the future to the extent that workers tried to maintain real wage growth; that was an upside risk to cost pressures.##NewPara##Wage settlements had varied across sectors. Public sector settlements had exceeded those in the private sector since early , but there were few signs of any spillovers. It seemed less likely that the public sector pay pressures would affect manufacturing than services, given the type of skills in demand in the public sector and the fact that, where the same type of skills were in demand, wages still tended to be higher in manufacturing than in private services.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Annual RPIX inflation was .% in June. This was lower than had been expected at the time of the May inflation projection. The Committee discussed the reasons for the June outturn and the prospects for the annual inflation rate over the next few months. First, most of the weakness of annual RPIX inflation in June reflected the historically low contribution of two volatile components##NewPara##of the RPI: seasonal food and petrol prices. That reflected a fall of around % in seasonal food prices from their flood-related high levels last year, together with a significant fall in oil prices, which in June were around % lower than a year earlier. The annual inflation rate of RPIX excluding seasonal food and petrol was .% in June. Second, annual RPIX inflation had fallen by##NewPara##. percentage points since its recent peak in January. This fall was entirely accounted for by sharply lower annual goods price inflation, which had fallen by around  percentage points since January to##NewPara##-.% in June, the lowest rate since the start of the series in . Around half of that fall reflected a significantly lower contribution from seasonal food prices due to movements in those prices twelve months earlier (so-called  base effects ) and the recent sharp price falls. These falls had been partially offset by a small rise in annual services price inflation.##NewPara##The outturn in June still seemed likely to represent a low point for RPIX inflation, as had been expected at the turn of the year. Base effects over the coming months, mainly relating to seasonal food and petrol prices, would, other things equal, lead to increases in annual RPIX inflation over the remainder of this year. The two most significant of these would be in July and November. In July, last year s fall between June and July of almost % in seasonal food prices would no longer contribute to the annual comparison, and in November, last year s fall between October and November of over % in petrol prices would no longer reduce the inflation figure; each of these base effects would add . percentage points to annual RPIX inflation in the relevant months. Past rapid rises in UK house prices were also likely to put upward pressure on the twelve-month inflation rate via the element of the RPI capturing housing depreciation.##NewPara##One feature of the current conjuncture was the size of the gap between annual goods and services price inflation   over six percentage points in June. That was much greater than was likely to be sustainable, given historical differences in productivity growth in goods and services production, which implied a long-run gap closer to %- %. Base effects were likely to narrow the gap over the rest of the year. But the low level of goods price inflation was a worldwide phenomenon, possibly reflecting the global slowdown last year. That might change as the global recovery proceeded. Oil prices had remained surprisingly stable.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The Committee noted that all the economists polled by Reuters expected no change in the repo rate this month. Short-term market interest rates had fallen, suggesting that the likely date of an increase in the repo rate had receded in the view of financial market participants.##NewTopic##The August GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections to be published in the##NewPara##Based on the assumption of an unchanged official repo rate of % over the next two years, according to the central projection, the annual rate of GDP growth would rise over the next year or so to around its long-run trend, and remain close to that level thereafter; the twelve-month RPIX inflation rate would increase to %- % by the end of this year and would then rise gently, reaching the  % target in around two years  time. Inflation would be increasing less rapidly at the end of the forecast period than envisaged in May. In the Inflation Report fan charts, the balance of risks to growth was symmetric in the first year and weighted marginally to the downside in the second year. The risks to inflation were also evenly balanced in the first year, but were weighted to the upside in the second year. There were some differences among the Committee about the overall balance of risks, but the spread of opinion was relatively small. The Committee noted that these projections were similar to the consensus of outside forecasts.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Committee members agreed that the latest economic data broadly confirmed that a gradual increase in the pace of global economic activity was under way. There had, however, been some signs of greater weakness than expected in the euro area. Also, estimates of US GDP had been revised downwards and growth in  Q had been a little lower than expected. In the##NewPara##United Kingdom, growth was estimated to have picked up sharply in Q, though it was unlikely to sustain that rate in the near term. Interpreting the latest UK activity data was difficult, however, because this June had been atypical on account of the Jubilee long weekend and other factors. The inflation outturn in June had been unexpectedly low, largely because of erratic factors that were##NewPara##likely to unwind. The main news on the month had been in asset prices: the sharp falls in equity markets around the world and, to a lesser extent, the rise in sterling s effective exchange rate. These developments, if they persisted, would tend to reduce the growth of consumption and investment and reduce cost pressures; but they were also a source of considerable uncertainty about the outlook for output and inflation.##NewPara##The Committee considered what level of interest rates was appropriate in the light of prospective RPIX inflation. At recent meetings, the Committee had discussed the case for an interest rate increase. The declines in equity prices had moderated the outlook for inflation and the case for a rise in rates was, at the very least, less urgent. Indeed, given recent developments, there were several factors now suggesting that a reduction in interest rates might be warranted. First, as the new inflation projection was below  % for most of the forecast period, a small reduction in rates might be appropriate, given the Committee s mandate to aim for  % inflation at all times. Second, the global recovery was fragile;  domestic demand in the euro area remained weak, and imbalances in the US economy might still exert more of a drag on output than currently expected; the shortfall in Q GDP growth relative to expectations could point in that direction. In the United States, at least, equity valuations still looked high by historical standards on some calculations; and, judging by recent experience, any further falls there were likely to be reflected in UK equity prices, at least in the short run. Market participants might also have doubts about the capacity of policymakers in the United States and the euro area to respond to further falls, given the already low level of interest rates, the recent loosening of fiscal policy in the United States, and the constraints on fiscal policy in the euro area. Third, in the view of some members, there was also a risk, not reflected in the central projection, of continuing deflation of world goods prices, which had persistently turned out lower than expected.##NewPara##There were, however, arguments against reducing the repo rate, and these were seen as more compelling. First, the analysis embodied in the new Inflation Report projection of inflation did not suggest that a reduction in the repo rate from its current level of % was needed in order to meet the target over the medium term. The decline in equity markets since the projections published in the May Inflation Report had moderated the outlook for inflation. At unchanged official interest rates, RPIX inflation was expected to return towards the  % target over the next two years, rising slightly above it at the forecast horizon. Second, over the previous week, equity markets had moved above the  working-day average for equity prices used as the starting point for the forecast. It was##NewPara##sensible to wait and see whether markets settled in their current range before adjusting the repo rate. Third, house prices had continued to increase rapidly, and this would sustain the strong growth of consumption, at least for some time. Moreover, households could more easily than in the past increase their withdrawal of mortgage equity. In these circumstances, a reduction in interest rates now risked further stimulating the housing market, increasing the risk of a sharp correction later.##NewPara##Fourth, there were upside risks to inflation from the planned increases in National Insurance contributions and, in the view of some Committee members, from the sterling exchange rate.##NewPara##Finally, reducing the repo rate would risk denting confidence by implying that conditions were worse than the Committee believed them to be.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.##NewPara##Finally, on the occasion of David Clementi s last Committee meeting, the Governor expressed his appreciation of the contribution he had made to the Committee. The Treasury representative added the Chancellor s thanks for the way in which Mr Clementi had fulfilled his responsibilities.