The world economy##NewPara##The Committee explored whether or not there might be different signals on the position of the global economy from the official data released over the month, surveys, and asset prices. Some contrasts were, at least at first sight, arguably present in the US data and surveys. On the one hand, output had fallen by only .% in Q over Q, rather less than generally expected. Recent data suggested that some elements of consumer spending had recovered somewhat following a dip immediately after  September; for example, spending on vehicles had been robust, although it was difficult to assess how much that was due to % finance deals and so how persistent it would be. On the other hand, surveys had been very weak. The National Association of Purchasing Managers  (NAPM) index for manufacturing had fallen from . in September to . in October, the largest monthly fall since . The non-manufacturing NAPM had also fallen sharply   from . to .   over the same period. The US Conference Board measure of consumer confidence had dropped from##NewPara##. to ., although the Michigan measure had risen slightly. The one area where the official data were conspicuously weak, and so apparently more consistent with the picture from surveys, was the labour market. Unemployment had risen from .% to .% in October, and payrolls had dropped by ,, with September s fall revised up to ,.##NewPara##Albeit to a lesser degree than for the United States, the signals from data for the euro area were also mixed. On the one hand, there were perhaps some signs of stabilisation in recent industrial production and consumer spending data. On the other hand, business confidence had fallen from - in September to - in October. The manufacturing purchasing managers  index (PMI) was down to##NewPara##. from . in September, and the services PMI had dropped from . to .. Consumer confidence had fallen too.##NewPara##One possible explanation for these mixed signals was that the official data showed that the world economy had been slowing less rapidly in the period leading up to  September than the Committee##NewPara##had thought at its previous meeting; in his recent Congressional testimony, Chairman Greenspan had appeared to take a view of the US economy consistent with that. If so, the forward-looking surveys and the US labour market data might reflect a bigger-than-previously-expected impact from the  September tragedy. In that case, the question was whether the effects would be persistent or transitory. The sharp changes in employment and unemployment were plausibly to some extent a one-off adjustment by firms in sectors that were particularly adversely affected (for example, airlines, hotels, and transport services)   though in some cases perhaps bringing forward adjustments to overcapacity existing before  September. However, over half of the fall in employment seemed to have occurred in sectors which were not so obviously directly affected. It was too early to reach robust judgments about the outlook for US labour market conditions.##NewPara##It was difficult to know whether the surveys were conveying hard information about changes in spending plans or a more general deterioration in sentiment. Given the trauma experienced in the United States, there was likely to be some element of the latter, which would be difficult to map into forecasts of economic behaviour. But some survey measures, including the US NAPM, were built up from detailed questions about actual economic circumstances and plans, which fortified a judgment that the surveys were indeed pointing to a markedly weaker near-term economic outlook. It was suggested that this was corroborated by a range of other US indicators. For example, manufacturing capacity utilisation was lower than for nearly twenty years, house price growth had eased back for two months, the housebuilders index was down, and the Michigan survey recorded households as expecting the slowest rate of income growth for around ten years.##NewPara##Asset prices, however, seemed to tell a different story. Although well down from the levels prevailing when the Committee agreed its August projections, world equity prices had recovered from the post- September fall, rising materially over the month: the Wilshire by .%, the Dow by .%, the Dax by .% and the FTSE All Share by .%. In part, that might be explained by the ebb and flow of uncertainty being reflected in fluctuations in risk premia in financial markets. It was also possible that asset markets were reflecting the effects of reductions in official interest rates on the rate at which expected corporate earnings were discounted, together with a market view that earnings growth would be weak only temporarily given that monetary policy easing and, in the United States, a prospective fiscal stimulus over and above the operation of the automatic stabilisers. Some support for that view was provided by the US $ short-term interest rate futures contracts, which embodied a market expectation of rising rates next year and therefore implied an expectation of recovering growth##NewPara##by then. While near-term forecasts of corporate earnings growth had been marked down, the expected longer-term growth rate had not changed much, though at % per annum the Institutional Brokers Estimate System survey of longer-term earnings growth still looked relatively high.##NewPara##Against that background, and with Japan in recession and other parts of Asia notably weak given the sharp decline in demand for information and communications technology (ICT) goods, the Committee agreed that the slowdown in world economic growth was now likely to be both deeper and longer than earlier thought. Views varied on the degree of the deterioration. Some members noted that some recent outside forecasts of world growth were materially weaker than the Committee s.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##As in the rest of the world, there were some differences between backward and forward-looking indicators of activity in the United Kingdom.##NewPara##The preliminary output-based estimate for GDP growth in Q had, at .%, been a little higher than expected. The September industrial production data suggested, however, that it might be revised down slightly; and it was suggested that the pressures on some sectors, for example hotels, were perhaps not yet reflected in the data. Against that, there had been significant upward revisions to preliminary estimates over the past ten years.##NewPara##The differences across sectors of the economy had been more apparent in the recent data. Manufacturing output had fallen by .% in Q, largely reflecting continued weakness in the electrical and optical sector, whereas services was estimated to have grown by .%, with distribution particularly strong. Consistent with this picture of increased imbalances, consumption had so far remained robust: retail sales had grown by .% in September and by .% in Q as a whole. There were, though, some signs of a slowdown in forward-looking surveys and other indicators. Consumer confidence, on both the GfK and MORI measures, was weaker than a few months ago. The CBI Distributive Trades survey suggested that consumption had weakened in October. House prices (on both the Halifax and Nationwide measures) had fallen slightly on the month, and mortgage loan approvals had dipped. However, the October British Retail Consortium (BRC) survey of retail sales, by contrast, had been strong. Looking further ahead, the Committee concluded that the falls in financial wealth this year, softer labour market conditions and the drop in consumer confidence, taken##NewPara##together, pointed to a prospective slowdown in household spending growth. But members varied in their confidence as to whether the slowdown had already begun and about how rapid it would be.##NewPara##There were probably clearer signs of a slowdown on the output side. The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) services activity balance had fallen from . in September to . in October   the lowest level since the series began in , although as an indicator of future services activity it provided only part of the picture since it excluded the recently-strong distribution sector. Although it had edged up slightly on the month, the CIPS manufacturing PMI was still weak, pointing to falls in activity; and the monthly and quarterly CBI manufacturing surveys had weakened further. The construction PMI index had fallen below  in October, to its lowest level for around two and a half years. This suggested to some members that the weakness initially evident in industrial production might be spreading through the economy. The Bank s regional Agents had reported that business confidence was weak, with further declines in manufacturing orders and slowing activity in business services.##NewPara##On balance, the Committee concluded that UK demand and output growth would, at an unchanged repo rate of .%, be weaker over the next year or so than expected at its previous meeting.##NewPara##Given that the prospective slowdown was rooted in the shocks to global activity and demand, the Committee debated the implications for UK net trade. It was striking that imports as well as exports had been weak so far this year. This was presumably at least partly accounted for by a slowdown in inventory accumulation: there had been a particularly large fall in UK imports of intermediate goods. That in turn reflected the nature of the shock which, in large measure, was to global demand for ICT capital goods. As investment goods had a high import content, that would tend to bring about falls in imports as well as in exports and domestic demand. Since imports would contract, aggregate demand and output growth would plausibly fall by less than would simply be implied by the reduction in exports. To that extent, the negative contribution of net trade to UK output growth would tend to be smaller than from a more generalised adverse shock to global demand.##NewPara##Even after taking that into account, however, the Committee was projecting increasing trade and current account deficits, partly reflecting a view that domestic demand would continue to grow faster in the United Kingdom than in the rest of the world. That was part of the background to the downside risk to the exchange rate incorporated into the Committee s published fan charts.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##The money and credit data provided one possible cross-check on the picture presented by the data and surveys on demand and output. The household monetary data remained very strong: household M and Divisia money were growing robustly, credit growth was now over %, and mortgage rates were at record lows. Taken together, these data pointed to continuing robust household spending in the near term. By contrast, the corporate sector monetary data were more consistent with weakness.##NewPara##The Committee debated the risks to sterling s exchange rate. Some members placed considerable emphasis, given the projection of persistent trade deficits, on the potential upside risks to inflation from the possibility of a sterling depreciation.  For them, it was not easy to see how the external/internal imbalance could be resolved at the current real exchange rate.##NewPara##Some other members were doubtful whether downside risks to sterling implied upside risks for the inflation outlook, emphasising that the implications of any depreciation for inflation and so for policy would depend crucially on the circumstances in which it occurred. By way of illustration, various possible scenarios were identified. First, any tendency for sterling to depreciate might be moderated in an environment of a recovering world economy and robust domestic demand growth, since financial markets might then expect monetary policy to be tighter than otherwise.  Second, if sterling were to fall against a background of persistently weak external demand, the implications for aggregate demand and inflation might be welcome. Third, if households were abruptly to cut spending in order to rebuild their balance sheets, a weakening exchange rate might help to alleviate the impact on aggregate demand and inflation. More broadly, there was uncertainty about the extent to which a sterling depreciation would feed through into domestic prices. Provided any fall in the exchange rate was moderate, foreign exporters might accept lower margins, leaving their sterling prices more or less unchanged, so that the direct effect on the price level might be quite small.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Employment had fallen slightly over the three months to August compared with the previous three months. It was no longer growing at the same rate as the population of working age. On the Labour Force Survey measure, unemployment had risen over that period, although it had continued to fall, including in September, on the claimant-count measure.##NewPara##Surveys generally pointed to weaker employment intentions, and the CIPS services survey indicated falling demand for labour for the first time since early . The Bank s regional Agents had reported that a turning point had been reached. The October Recruitment and Employment Confederation survey of agency workers, although not fully representative of the labour market as a whole, had recorded weaker demand for temporary staff as well as continuing weak demand for permanent placements. While the BCC survey continued to report recruitment difficulties, it was possible that this reflected problems for firms in finding the specific skills and experience mix they desired, and as such might have a structural as well as a cyclical element.##NewPara##Regular pay had been increasing at an annual rate of over %. But headline earnings growth had been stable at around  % for four months, as bonuses had been falling quite sharply. Members felt that bonuses were likely to continue to fall in some sectors, such as financial services, in the period ahead. The Bank s regional Agents had suggested that the more difficult environment was lowering expected wage increases.##NewPara##Overall, there were some signs, therefore, that labour market conditions had at least plateaued, and were perhaps easing slightly.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Oil prices were down about $ per barrel on the month, and other commodity prices had weakened too. Sterling commodity prices had fallen slightly in the twelve months to September, a sharp turnaround from increasing at an annual rate of over % in the summer. The CIPS survey input price series was also weak. These developments were not surprising given the slowdown in world activity. While it was not clear precisely what was implied for UK retail price inflation, given the less close link in recent years between input prices and retail prices, it was clear that  pipeline inflationary pressures  were subdued globally and in the United Kingdom.##NewPara##The short-term outlook for RPIX was somewhat weaker than a month ago, partly reflecting the likelihood that the fall in oil prices would pass through quickly into UK petrol prices.##NewTopic##The November GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections to be published in the##NewPara##On the assumption of an unchanged official repo rate of .% over the next two years, the central projection would have been for RPIX inflation to be materially below the  % target throughout the forecast period.##NewPara##On an alternative assumption of an official repo rate of .% over the next two years, the central projection was for GDP growth to be below trend for a while next year before recovering to about trend around the end of the two-year forecast horizon. The central projection for RPIX inflation edged down to around % in the coming months before rising back towards the target.  In the Inflation Report fan charts, the risks to growth were balanced, and the risks to inflation were weighted slightly to the upside, principally reflecting the possibility of a sterling depreciation.##NewPara##Some members preferred different assumptions for both the central projections and risks. Some thought the most likely outlook for inflation was a little higher. Others thought that it could be up to half a percentage point lower, reflecting views that the world economic downturn was likely be deeper and longer than assumed, that the effect of the global slowdown on UK inflation would be greater, and that there would be downward pressures on inflation from higher-than-earlier-thought supply capacity in the economy. On risks, some members placed greater weight on the possibility of a sterling depreciation and on the projected slowdown in consumer spending taking a while to come through. Others assigned a lower probability to a depreciation when the UK economy was growing faster than the rest of the G, but placed more weight on the possibility that consumer and/or corporate spending would weaken soon and sharply or on the risk of the world economy being even weaker than in their central projection. For them the balance of risks for both growth and inflation was on the downside.##NewTopic##Possible tactical considerations##NewPara##The Committee noted that the balance of market opinion was that there would be an immediate repo rate cut of  basis points, with a strong expectation that rates would move lower in subsequent##NewPara##months; but that some weight was placed on the possibility of a  basis point cut this month. A  no change  decision would come as a considerable surprise.##NewPara##The Federal Reserve had the previous day cut by a further  basis points, and the ECB was meeting at the same time as the MPC. Members noted that the reaction in financial markets, particularly in currency markets, to whatever they decided to do was difficult to predict, and would depend partly on what the ECB did.##NewPara##If a cut larger than  basis points were judged to be warranted by the economic fundamentals, one possible tactical consideration was whether, in terms of the likely impact on confidence, there was greater advantage in moving in one step or in a series of smaller steps. Given the possible fragility of confidence in the current environment, the factors relevant to the decision depended to a greater extent than usual on judgments of timing and psychology.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##For most members, the outlook for inflation, and the balance of risks, were broadly as published in the Inflation Report fan charts. Even before  September, the global economy had slowed more than had been built into the Committee s August projections; and the tragic events of  September had been a further negative shock, probably with larger effects than the Committee had assumed at its October meeting. World price pressures were also now weaker. Domestically, output growth had so far been remarkably resilient, staying fairly close to trend. There were, though, now signs of a slowdown. These were most evident in the surveys and in reports from the Bank s regional Agents. Consumption growth was expected to slow given the fall this year in financial wealth, weaker household confidence and the evidence of easing in labour market conditions, but a key question was when that slowdown would start to come through. Cost and price pressures were subdued. The latest projections reflected this analysis. For these members, therefore, the immediate policy choice, turning on judgments of the effects on confidence, was between an immediate reduction of  basis points and a reduction of  basis points immediately with a clear prospect, assuming no material news in the interim, of a further  basis point cut at a subsequent meeting.##NewPara##Various possible arguments   given different weights by different members   were identified which might favour an immediate cut of only  basis points. First, the assessment of the deteriorating##NewPara##outlook placed considerable weight on surveys. But surveys tended to be volatile and might be influenced by temporary factors. Given that the hard data on consumption and domestic demand remained strong, there was a case for waiting to see evidence of whether retail sales had, in fact, slowed since September, and whether the weakness in surveys persisted. Too large a cut might fuel consumer borrowing growth excessively, weakening household balance sheets and adding to risks for the future, so prudence might point to delaying until there was harder evidence of a slowdown.##NewPara##Second, a  basis point cut might incorrectly signal that conditions in the United Kingdom were as difficult as in the euro area, and as in the United States, where the FOMC had already cut by a further  basis points. If so, the effect might, perversely, be to dent rather than support confidence. Third, a sequence of small cuts might have a more potent effect on confidence than a larger cut if the fact of cutting, and the attendant media coverage, were important. Fourth, there might be a larger overall effect if a cut now were followed by another at the Committee s December meeting, which fell in the middle of the Christmas shopping period.##NewPara##Most members nevertheless concluded in favour of an immediate reduction of  basis points. First, a  basis point cut might do more to underpin confidence domestically, by underlining the Committee s continued readiness to act to support demand in line with achieving the inflation target over the medium term. A departure from moving in relatively small steps might have an effect particularly well suited to the current conjuncture, when the considerable uncertainty about economic prospects might be affecting business and consumer confidence. Second, although there was no mechanical link between the Committee s projections and policy, it would not be easy to explain why rates had not been cut by  basis points, since the forecast would clearly imply that a  basis point cut was very likely to be followed shortly by another. The publication of the Inflation Report would provide an opportunity to explain why the Committee had opted to move by  basis points, and the various uncertainties and risks. Third, given the fragile conditions internationally, a  basis point cut might help, alongside policy easings elsewhere, to support confidence internationally. That was relevant to the United Kingdom since the prospect of domestic slowdown was largely a consequence of the international weakness. Fourth, although there was uncertainty about the signals from the surveys, it was very unlikely that they would bounce back in the way they had following their similarly sharp weakness in the autumn of . The dip then had been prompted by global financial system distress, which had been successfully resolved, whereas now it was caused by shocks to the international real economy which were apparent in hard data. Given the prospect for inflation, there##NewPara##was almost no risk that the Committee would want in the near term to reverse a  basis point reduction.##NewPara##For one member, the immediate policy choice lay between a cut of  or  basis points. The news on the international front had been much worse than expected   in the United States, the euro area, and Japan. Reflecting that, the latest outside forecasts of world growth in  were materially weaker than assumed in the Committee s central projections. On this view, the impact of the international downturn on UK inflation would be greater than assumed, and that central projection also underestimated the supply potential of the UK economy. The prospects for inflation could eventually justify a cut in interest rates that was larger than  basis points. But while a  basis point cut would be a mild surprise, a  basis point cut would be a very big surprise, potentially damaging, rather than bolstering, confidence and causing volatility in financial markets. A  basis point cut now would be the better course this month.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be reduced by  basis points to .%. Eight members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, David Clementi, Christopher Allsopp, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Stephen Nickell and Sushil Wadhwani) voted in favour. Ian Plenderleith voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.