Monetary and financial developments##NewPara##The Committee agreed that the signs of a deceleration in broad money were now apparent. The three- and six-month annualised growth rates were both around %, bringing the twelve-month growth rate down to around % from -% in mid-.##NewPara##The sectoral data were, however, telling diverse stories. On the one hand, personal sector M growth seemed, if anything, to have been picking up slightly. Together with a slight rebound in M growth, to around %, and continuing strong consumer credit growth, this suggested that personal sector demand growth might have remained strong. That was consistent with the apparent recent strength in retail sales.##NewPara##By contrast, the position in the ICC sector seemed very different. The level of money holdings was barely changed over five months, and bank lending growth to ICCs had been weak. It was possible that this reflected the downturn in the externally exposed sectors of the economy. If so, the money and credit numbers were illustrating the different pressures on different parts of the economy. Staff analysis suggested that the effects of a monetary tightening were typically seen in the ICC sector before the personal sector.##NewPara##On another view, the money numbers did not provide much information. Given the inflation target of   % and trend real GDP growth of about   %, M growth above % or so needed to be accompanied by falling velocity. Velocity trends were, however, very difficult to explain or predict. The slowdown in broad money growth was in the right direction, and was implied by the central projection in the February Inflation Report, but the money numbers could not confirm whether the degree of policy tightening was##NewPara##sufficient to hit the inflation target. Slower money growth was to be expected given the interest rate increases during , especially in M and in deposit accounts which paid no or low rates of interest, although it was noted that the slowdown was not in fact in zero or low interest bearing money (M and personal sector M) and so was apparently not based on agents substituting out of money because the Bank had increased the cost of holding it.##NewPara##A further view, while agreeing that money growth should be expected to fall as the economy slowed, also placed weight on cumulative past rapid money growth, and the possibility that there remained a liquidity overhang in the OFI sector which could sustain asset price inflation.##NewPara##This led to a discussion of asset markets. Some members were concerned that, as in some previous cycles, cumulative rapid broad money growth might be associated with unsustainable asset price appreciation and domestic demand growth. Others were less sure. There was uncertainty about the degree to which asset price changes affected the demand for goods and services. The connection between money growth and asset prices was also unclear, not just in the UK but even more so in the US.##NewPara##Overall, the Committee agreed that the recent money and credit numbers suggested a slowing economy, but there was a range of views about how much weight to attach to them.##NewPara##Another aspect of monetary conditions debated by the Committee was the information potentially available from the yield curve. It was possible that the current inverted conventional gilt yield curve (with long maturity nominal rates below short maturity nominal rates) indicated an impending slowdown; the role of the yield curve slope as a leading indicator was supported by some (mostly US) academic research. On the other hand, the results in the literature could be explained by the influence on activity coming from movements in real rates. In particular the gap between short-term real interest rates, as effectively set by the central bank given sticky prices, and the equilibrium real rate should be the better leading indicator of activity. Indeed the nominal yield curve slope could be misleading, because it might change on account of developments in the monetary regime, as had occurred over the past year; the emergence of an inverted nominal yield curve might have been associated with the announcement of operational independence for the Bank, since this had caused a fall in long-run inflation expectations and thus in long-maturity nominal rates relative to short-maturity nominal rates. On this view, there was in principle no additional forward-looking information available from the slope of the conventional yield curve beyond that available from short-term real interest rates. But it was argued that, even if this were true, the conventional yield curve slope might be of some practical assistance given the technical##NewPara##difficulties associated with estimating the ex ante short real rate and the equilibrium real rate, neither of which could be observed directly.##NewPara##The Committee noted that, although there had been no change in the Bank s repo rate, the short end of the yield curve had risen by about bp since its previous meeting, apparently in response to the Inflation Report. And sterling had strengthened in the immediate run-up to the current MPC meeting. While it was possible that an immediate rise in the Bank s repo rate would be accompanied by an offsetting fall in market expectations of future interest rates, the Committee took the view that it would be more likely than not to prompt a further appreciation in sterling.##NewTopic##Real side puzzles##NewPara##The Committee recalled its assessment at earlier meetings that the short-to-medium run path for output and inflation, would in the absence of shocks be determined largely by the balance of influence of domestic demand and net trade. There was a series of puzzles in the data, making it difficult to assess this balance.##NewPara##The trend in consumption growth was difficult to identify due to the distortions caused by the funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales. Smoothing over the third and fourth quarters suggested a gradual slowdown in consumption growth. But recent data on car registrations and retail sales suggested that strong personal sector demand growth had in fact continued into . Consumer confidence, as measured in surveys, had fallen, but from exceptionally high levels in mid- associated with the windfall payments, so that the balances were still high compared with past cycles. Income from employment continued to grow strongly; house prices were up, on the Bank s estimate based on Land Registry data, by % in Q over the previous year, although other indicators suggested that the rate of increase was slowing; and financial asset prices had continued to rise rapidly, as already discussed. The background was therefore suggestive of a continuing impetus to robust consumption growth (and strong imports). Arguably this was apparent in the January retail sales figures, which taken together with December, recorded the strongest Christmas/New Year period growth since .##NewPara##Interpretation was not, however, straightforward. This was always the case for the Christmas/New Year period, given the strength of the seasonal pattern - spending was much higher in December than in##NewPara##January on an unadjusted basis. In addition, in this particular year, a pre-Christmas BRC survey had indicated that consumers had waited to make some major purchases out of windfall gains until the Christmas/New Year period, and that this had been planned last summer, so that the recent data should not be a surprise. January s strength had also been accompanied by aggressive discounting by stores, which some commentators attributed to retailers carrying higher-than-expected inventories at the end of . Reports from the Bank s regional Agents and surveys suggested that while buoyant retail business had continued into early February, it had since slowed. Finally, there had been profit warnings from some retail companies, perhaps suggesting that the underlying position was not as strong as the sales volume numbers implied.##NewPara##The GDP figures for Q implied a sharp fall in the trade balance. However, the monthly trade data recorded a small increase between Q and Q in export volumes of goods excluding oil and erratics, suggesting that the net trade weakness stemmed more from strong import growth than falling exports.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the significance of the growth of gross imports and exports compared with that of the overall trade balance. Net trade was not exogenous. Part of the explanation was related to relative income growth in the UK and overseas. Import volumes would be affected by the strength of domestic demand and exports would be affected by external demand, while both would reflect any domestic capacity constraints. Less comfort could be taken for the inflation outlook if the contribution of net trade to slowing aggregate demand growth came from rises in imports, since this might signal that domestic demand was not slowing fast enough.##NewPara##Another part of the explanation for strong import growth was the greater price competitiveness of imported goods and services caused by the strength of sterling. With this effect, import demand would be expected to be strong even in the face of slowing domestic demand, as home producers lost market share to importers. This effect put direct downward pressure on retail price inflation and indirectly added to the slowdown in domestic demand as home producers were forced either to cut costs or output. To the extent that import growth was a result of such price, rather than income, effects it did not signal the need to tighten monetary policy further.##NewPara##A declining trade balance could help to subdue inflationary pressures when domestic demand was above trend, since the economy could in effect borrow capacity from overseas. Domestic demand growth##NewPara##could then be reduced more gradually. There would be longer run effects since the current account deficits entailed would reduce the UK s net external assets and thus future levels of consumption. It was noted, however, that in the past strong domestic demand growth sucking in imports had been an indicator of masked inflationary pressures; that had been so in the mid-to-late s, when taking comfort from the ability of the external deficit to accommodate strong domestic demand had led to delays in taking necessary domestic policy action.##NewPara##The divergence between the ONS data and surveys of manufacturing had become more pronounced. The ONS data recorded a fall of .% in manufacturing output in Q over Q. Surveys, however, indicated positive, albeit weakening, growth; Bank staff estimated that the CBI survey responses implied above trend manufacturing growth in Q.##NewPara##There was a range of views on whether the official statistics or surveys should be given greater weight. On one view, the ONS s first estimate of GDP growth should, as a general rule, be given very little weight given the size of revisions. It would be better to treat the early ONS releases as forecasts rather than hard data.##NewPara##Another view was that the surveys did not track the finally revised official output numbers very well, and thus greater weight should be placed on the ONS data and in particular on the direction of revisions. The output growth data for Q had been revised down by . of a percentage point; this was news since the general expectation had been that there would be upward revisions.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that recent developments in activity were unclear. It was possible that the path of future output, and inflation, was more uncertain in the short run than suggested in the Bank s fan charts since the considerable uncertainty about recent past data - and hence the starting point - was not reflected. It was agreed that this issue should be investigated further for the May Inflation Report.##NewPara##There was also a range of views on the implications of the contrast between the manufacturing and service sectors. On one view, the slowdown in manufacturing growth was likely to have knock-on effects for services, directly through the dependence of business services on the production industries, and indirectly via slower personal sector income growth if wage growth and employment fell in##NewPara##manufacturing. On the other hand, it was argued that continued buoyancy in the services sector could help to sustain the demand for UK manufactures.##NewTopic##Fiscal developments##NewPara##The Committee noted the strong PSDR in January, which some commentators had attributed to higher than expected Inland Revenue receipts from personal tax self assessment, for the tax years / and /. When more data were available it would be important to assess whether this was likely to mean that measures of past national income - and so past output levels - would be revised upwards. It would also be necessary to assess whether the effect was cyclical, on account of the cyclical-sensitivity of income from investment and self-employment.##NewPara##Preliminary analysis by Bank staff suggested, however, that in terms of the current year s fiscal position, any extra revenue in January and possibly February from the introduction of self assessment was less material than the PSBR shortfall which had accumulated over previous months. The Committee noted that the July  Budget had expected to tighten fiscal policy, on a cyclically adjusted basis, by around % of GDP. The PSBR numbers since the Budget suggested that that might prove to be an underestimate, but it was too early to judge whether or not any difference was significant. If it were, the key question was whether any extra revenue was being generated by an increase in the tax base or the effective tax yield (or both). The former seemed unlikely judging by the GDP numbers published so far, but the National Accounts might be revised if any unexpected strength in tax revenues suggested that income or expenditure was stronger than previously thought. On the other hand, if the explanation lay in the effective tax yield, fiscal policy would be exerting a stronger future contractionary effect than expected. These were potentially important questions, to which the Committee agreed it would need to return as more information became available.##NewTopic##Labour market developments##NewPara##Unemployment had fallen again in January. This too was difficult to interpret. On the one hand, the twelve thousand fall in the claimant count was significantly below the average monthly fall during , suggesting that the pace of labour market tightening might be moderating. On the other hand, the Department of Employment thought the true fall might be greater as their statistics had been collected unusually early in the month, and very soon after the Christmas/New Year holidays.##NewPara##Other indicators were mixed. Whole economy underlying average earnings growth was unchanged at  /%. Wage settlements were still rising faster than a year ago; the three-month employment-weighted median was +.% compared with +.% in January , and the three-month employment-weighted mean had risen from +.% to +.% over the same period.##NewPara##Wage and earnings data were, however, backward-looking indicators of tightness. As in earlier months the Committee therefore discussed survey measures of tightness. Skilled labour shortages were apparently still increasing, as were recruitment intentions. The one exception was the CBI s measure of shortages of skilled labour in the manufacturing sector, which was consistent with other indicators of a slowdown in manufacturing growth.##NewPara##There was a range of views of what the latest data implied. One interpretation was that, although labour market conditions were still tightening, there were few signs that this was feeding into wages and earnings; after the upturn last summer, growth in settlements had been broadly flat. Since there was now evidence that the economy was slowing, the risks of continued earnings acceleration had diminished.##NewPara##Another interpretation recalled the advice of Bank staff last summer that great weight should not be put on the upturn in settlements that had been recorded then as there were relatively few settlements during the summer. In that case, there was news in the recent data since it covered a period when there were many settlements, and the best comparison was with the position a year ago.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the possible implications of the planned introduction of the Minimum Wage in April , observing that on its own it would be an adverse supply shock at the aggregate level, which would increase the natural rate of unemployment. It noted recent accounts that some employers were awarding wage increases to the low paid in anticipation of the Minimum Wage. The Bank s regional Agents were reporting various reasons why this might be so. One was that some firms making annual payment settlements that spanned the minimum wage s introduction preferred to increase pay now rather than go through a second pay round once the Government had responded to the Low Pay Commission report due in May. A second reason being aired was that some firms felt there would be a stigma attached to having to raise pay once the Minimum Wage was a formal requirement. A third possible explanation was that some firms were simultaneously increasing pay and trying to raise the quality/skills  of their employees, with the goal of reducing employment levels. A fourth was that employers were consolidating other parts of remuneration into basic pay so as to minimise the effect of the minimum wage on the total wage bill.##NewPara##The Committee concluded that it was not yet in a position to judge whether these effects, if true, would be significant. The important thing at this stage were the signs that the Minimum Wage might be##NewPara##affecting labour market conditions earlier than had been expected. The Committee agreed that this needed to be analysed carefully in time for its May Inflation Report.##NewTopic##International developments##NewPara##Recalling its earlier discussions of the Asian situation, the Committee agreed that there had been relatively few developments since its - February meeting. Indonesia looked worse, but other countries in Asia appeared to be making progress with their IMF programmes. The risks to activity had, however, possibly increased slightly, partly on account of the perception that the Japanese position was not improving. But this might be offset by a marginally better outlook for activity in the EU and USA. The Committee agreed that recent data were broadly in line with its expectations at the time of the February Inflation Report.##NewTopic##Cost pressures##NewPara##The Committee agreed that developments in Asia had contributed to very benign cost pressures. In particular, commodity prices were down % on a year ago. Manufacturing output prices (excluding excise duties) had also registered their first ever fall over a twelve-month period (on data constructed back to ).##NewPara##On one view this was encouraging for the inflation outlook; it took time for lower input prices to feed through to retail prices. The current cost picture could therefore help to sustain low inflation for some time to come. Another view emphasised that, notwithstanding falling commodity prices and sterling s appreciation, inflation had remained above the target for most of the past year. Strong domestic demand conditions had largely offset favourable cost developments. Looking forwards, there was no reason to expect that commodity prices would continue to fall, or that sterling would continue to appreciate, making the accumulated underlying domestic inflationary pressures more important to the medium-term outlook.##NewTopic##What has changed since the February Inflation Report?##NewPara##Drawing together its discussion of recent developments, the Committee reviewed what had changed since it finalised its February Inflation Report.##NewPara##That broad money growth had slowed now seemed reasonably clear and offered some reassurance, but the sectoral differences were striking. Unchanged personal sector M growth combined with % M growth and continued strong growth in consumer credit contrasted markedly with weak ICC deposit and bank lending growth. Financial asset price growth had persisted, and the exchange rate had appreciated##NewPara##rather than depreciating in line with expectations. Money market conditions had also tightened, with the money market yield curve about -bp higher out to .##NewPara##In the labour market, developments had not so far been as bad as some had feared. But pay settlements had now been quite high for a prolonged period, and earnings growth was only just consistent with the inflation target. Other cost pressures and price developments were more benign than expected. Given the PSBR numbers, the current fiscal position might be tighter than earlier expected.##NewPara##But little had happened to help clarify the outlook for demand and output. Domestic demand and the productive capacity of the economy remained the key issues. Given past monetary and fiscal tightenings, sterling s level, and the fading effect of windfall gains, Members agreed domestic demand was likely to slow. But the pace and extent of the slowdown remained highly uncertain.##NewTopic##General considerations bearing on interest rate setting##NewPara##Given that the Committee s assessment of the economic outlook and appropriate policy stance was finely balanced, the Committee reviewed some of the general considerations bearing on its choices before turning to its immediate policy decision.##NewPara##First, in any given circumstances, a variety of different interest rate paths could in principle achieve the inflation target. What factors were relevant to the preferred profile of rates? One element of this was the role that the projected path of output should play. There was a broad consensus that the Committee should in principle be concerned about deviations of the level of output from capacity. If the economy operated below capacity, productive resources would be underutilised and inflation would be tending to fall; on the other hand, attempting to operate the economy at above capacity levels of output would be unsustainable and lead to increasing inflation. The desirable rate of growth of output was itself affected by whether the economy was running at or below capacity. In circumstances where the actual level of output was above its capacity level, actual growth would need to be below the growth rate of capacity output for a period in order to bring the economy back to equilibrium. While the Committee agreed that in principle it should be concerned about minimising deviations from capacity rather than smoothing growth rates per se, the practical difficulty was that the trend rate of growth could not be observed with sufficient precision for estimated deviations from capacity output to serve as a clear guide to policy.##NewPara##The Committee considered the way in which uncertainty entered into the forecast, and the implications of that for the determination of interest rates. Three distinct issues were discussed. The first concerned the meaning of the fan charts published in the Inflation Report. The MPC is committed to publishing forecasts in the form of fan charts because they emphasise the fact that forecasts are statements about probabilities of different outcomes. The charts seek to represent the quantifiable uncertainties about the future paths of inflation and output. The bands in the charts reflect the Committee s judgment##NewPara##about the risks to the central projection, and can encompass minor differences of view about those risks. But there might be circumstances where the differences among the Committee members about the nature and magnitude of the risks were more significant. In such circumstances, it would be necessary to publish fan charts corresponding to more than one forecast.##NewPara##A second issue was the relationship between the forecast for inflation over the next two years or so and the decision on the current level of short-term interest rates. Although the fan chart sought to capture all the relevant issues, it could not be used as a mechanical determinant of the policy decision. Since the fan charts were conditioned on particular paths for interest rates over the next two years (for example, constant rates or the path of rates implied by futures markets), the fan charts could indicate no more than the prospects for inflation were one of those paths to be followed. They could imply the need for policy action, but did not in themselves dictate mechanically precisely by how much or when official interest rates should change.##NewPara##The third issue was whether the existence of uncertainty, or the nature of the uncertainty surrounding inflation, was a reason for delay in taking action that might otherwise seem warranted. Two views were expressed on this. The first was that policy should reflect the latest news and that uncertainty in itself was no reason for delay. The second was that there might be particular cases, where the implied need was for only a small interest rate change, when the cost of a short delay would be small and new information  might give more confidence about the need for the change, or not. In those circumstances a delay could be warranted to reduce the risk of unnecessary reversals of policy.##NewPara##A further issue was the optimal frequency of changes in interest rates. In particular, members discussed whether there were costs to rapid reversals of policy; eg cutting rates very shortly after having raised them. On one view such reversals could be misunderstood, creating uncertainty both in financial markets and in the wider economy and damaging the credibility of the MPC process. An alternative view was that this position was irrational. So long as any policy reversals could be properly explained by new developments or improved analysis of the outlook, they need not create confusion about policy goals or the MPC s approach. On that view, there were no benefits in delaying changes in rates to reduce the risk of reversals, and it was better to make changes as soon as they appeared necessary. Also, the desire to minimise the risk of policy reversals was likely to mean that interest rate changes would, on average, be made too late.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee discussed its immediate decision about interest rates. Against the background of the Committee s assessment that there had been only a modest amount of news since it finalised the February Inflation Report, the considerations were broadly the same as at its - February meeting.##NewPara##A number of arguments were advanced for an interest rate increase now. First, on one view it was more likely than not that the level of output was above trend, and the level of unemployment below the natural rate. While earnings growth was still just about consistent with the inflation target, earnings were a lagging indicator of tightness. It was necessary - however difficult - to take a view on where the economy was in relation to trend. Personal sector demand seemed to remain robust, so there was little sign of the level of output returning to trend quickly. On the view that the level of activity was above its capacity level, steps therefore needed to be taken to reduce output growth below trend for a period. The current policy setting should bring output back in line with trend over a period but the slowdown was unlikely to be sufficient to avoid inflation rising above the target in two years time.##NewPara##If output were above trend, there were greater risks involved in delaying a rate increase than in acting early. If policy were tightened now but this was later reversed on account of news that the slowdown was sharper than currently expected, the net effect would be that output had been brought back to trend earlier than expected. But this needed to happen anyway, so it would simply have accelerated the process. On the other hand, if policy action was delayed but growth continued in line with the central projection, the gap between the level of actual output and trend output would increase. The Committee would then have to tighten policy more sharply in due course, perhaps at a time when output growth was already falling, increasing the risk of aggravating the slowdown. Thus, on the view that the level of output was above trend, the risks run by acting early were small and certainly lower than the risks run by delaying.##NewPara##Second, surveys strongly suggested that the general public s expectations of inflation over the next couple of years were materially above the inflation target, even after adjusting for the fact that most surveys covered the RPI rather than the targeted RPIX. It was the public s expectations that were relevant to wage bargaining. Early policy tightening was needed to bring core inflation, as measured by the public s expectations, into line with the target. This would require below-trend growth for a period.##NewPara##Third, as indicated in the February Inflation Report, the risks were clearly on the upside, with the mean inflation rate two or so years ahead materially above the   % target, and a % chance of being above   % in Q , on the assumption that the Bank s repo rate remained at .%.##NewPara##A number of arguments were advanced against a rise in rates, at least immediately. First, arguments for an immediate tightening placed great weight on the level of output having been above trend since last summer, but this was a highly uncertain judgment. There were major uncertainties about both trend output and the current actual level of output. These uncertainties about the current position of the economy - and in particular about short term downside risks to output - were perhaps not fully captured in the February Inflation Report.##NewPara##Second, the central projection was below the target until the latter part of the forecast horizon. This partly reflected the assumption of constant interest rates throughout the forecast period. Both these arguments pointed to avoiding using the forecast fan chart mechanically.##NewPara##Third, even assuming that a tightening would be needed at some point to achieve the target, the best profile over time might involve a delay in raising interest rates. The economy was projected to slow from the effects on net trade of sterling s appreciation and the Asian developments. A later tightening might affect domestic demand when the dampening effects of sterling s appreciation and Asia were wearing off. This could potentially avoid exacerbating the incipient slowdown in activity while nevertheless achieving the inflation target.##NewPara##Fourth, while there were clear upside risks to inflation, how to react to some of them - such as sterling depreciating more rapidly than implied by uncovered interest parity - was better assessed if and when the risk started to emerge. It was also possible that the downside risks - for example, from Asia - had increased somewhat.##NewPara##Taking these four arguments together, the benefits of waiting to gather information to help resolve the particular uncertainty about the current position of the economy could outweigh the costs. Responding immediately also ran the risk of having to incur what some members saw as the costs entailed by a quick reversal of policy.##NewPara##Members of the Committee agreed, however, that the gap between the differing points of view had probably narrowed slightly since the February meeting. On the one hand, although the Christmas period seasonal adjustments were difficult to interpret, the most recent data did not offer much support for an immediate slowdown in consumption. On the other hand, monetary growth had started to slow, the fiscal position might be tighter than earlier expected, the labour market position had not deteriorated at the rate feared by some, and sterling had not fallen in line with the assumption in central projection. The Committee agreed that the development of the labour market data over the next few months would be especially important to assessing the position of the economy and the inflation outlook.##NewPara##The Governor invited members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be left unchanged this month. Four members of the Committee (the Governor, David Clementi,##NewPara##DeAnne Julius and Ian Plenderleith) voted for the proposition, and four (Alan Budd, Willem Buiter, Charles Goodhart and Mervyn King) voted against, preferring an immediate increase in interest rates. The Governor exercised his casting vote in favour of the proposition and the repo rate was thus left unchanged.