Financial markets##NewPara##Yield curves had moved little over the month. Short-term interest rates were a little lower in the United States and in the euro area, and barely changed in the United Kingdom (having risen a little in the previous few days). Longer-term nominal rates had been uniformly lower at maturities out to ten years until a day or two before the meeting. Those lower rates were associated mainly with lower real interest rates rather than with changes in expected inflation.##NewPara##Equity prices had increased in all the major markets. The FTSE All-Share index was % higher on the month, rising more than most major international equity markets in common currency terms. That and the interest rate movements seemed to be consistent with the pattern of economic news over the past month, which had been rather more positive (relative to expectations) in the United Kingdom than in the United States or the euro area.##NewPara##The main financial market development, however, had been the appreciation of sterling: its effective rate was more than % higher on the month. That took the effective rate to about % above its level at the turn of the year, returning it to the range in which it had been trading at the beginning of . Its movements did not, on this occasion, seem simply to reflect movements in US dollar exchange rates: sterling was stronger against a wide range of currencies. Given the similarity of yield curve movements, relative interest rates could account for only a small proportion of sterling s recent appreciation   which ruled out a purely cyclical explanation. A UK-specific explanation therefore seemed to be required.##NewPara##A range of possible explanations for the strength of sterling was discussed. One was that market participants had revised their assessment of the equilibrium real sterling exchange rate, interpreting the recent data on UK demand (with consumption growth, in particular, stronger than previously thought) as reflecting a permanent strengthening relative to other countries. But it was not clear what might##NewPara##have triggered that reassessment. Another was that there might have been changes in expected inflation, either in the United Kingdom or abroad. But there was little evidence for that proposition. A further possibility was that portfolio flows from dollars into sterling, associated with changes in the risk premium on sterling-denominated assets, may have represented efforts by investors   including some Asian central banks   to diversify their portfolios.##NewTopic##The world economy##NewPara##In UK-weighted terms, the month s news on world activity was perhaps mildly on the downside. Though fourth-quarter GDP growth in the United States was, at %, the same as in the advance release and confirmed the continuing recovery there, the .% outturn for the euro area was weaker than the Committee had been expecting. Growth in Japan, by contrast, was again stronger than expected and growth elsewhere in Asia remained robust.##NewPara##In the United States, the labour market had become the key uncertainty about the sustainability of the recovery. Investment was continuing to increase and this improvement seemed firmly based; production had increased by .% in January; and business surveys remained quite strong. But non- farm payrolls, although they had increased in each of the past five months, were growing only modestly, and less rapidly than the working age population. This recovery in employment was very subdued by comparison with previous cycles. Consumer confidence had fallen sharply in February, apparently because of pessimism about labour market prospects. A lack of sustained employment gains could prove a threat to consumption growth   despite the support to spending from recent tax cuts   and that in turn could slow the recovery. However, the employment components of the ISM surveys were considerably stronger than at their low points in  and . Recent rapid rates of productivity growth must in part have been cyclical and, as those short-term gains were exhausted, it was reasonable to assume that employment growth would pick up to more normal levels so long as demand growth was sustained.##NewPara##Fourth-quarter growth in the euro area was, at .% on the flash estimate, rather softer than had been expected. On the limited information so far available, it seemed that the relative weakness was mainly accounted for by a more negative net trade position. The latter could simply represent a more- rapid-than-expected unwinding of the unexpectedly strong net trade outturn in the third quarter, and so to that extent did not imply weaker prospects for  and beyond. The euro-area manufacturing PMI and industrial confidence indicators were unchanged in February, though the pan-German IFO index##NewPara##fell for the first time since last April and the euro-area services PMI was also weaker. But taken together, the survey indicators still pointed to stronger growth in the first quarter of this year; and consumer confidence had strengthened. In Germany, investment growth in the fourth quarter was the strongest for over four years. Interpretation of these data was complicated by the prospective cut in subsidies to housing investment. Some of the recent growth might therefore represent housing investment that had been brought forward.##NewPara##The news from Asia, by contrast, was rather stronger than expected. Fourth-quarter growth in Japan was reported to have been .%, substantially above the figure included in the Committee s February projections. While there might be doubts about this figure, it was noteworthy that nominal GDP had increased by .% and that the all-activity index had been .% higher. GDP growth had generally also picked up elsewhere in Asia.##NewPara##The co-incident recoveries in the main economic blocs and continuing strong growth in China gave rise to the possibility that worldwide inflation could pick up too, as it had done in similar circumstances in the late s and early s. Commodity prices were rising: oil spot and futures prices were higher, metals prices had risen by almost % on the month and non-food agricultural prices had also risen. But while the increases over recent months were quite marked in US dollar terms, this partly reflected the weakness of the dollar. In any case, commodity prices were probably rather less important as a proximate indicator of inflation in the industrial countries than they had been thirty years ago, as output was less commodity-intensive and monetary policies were better focused. So a repeat of that earlier inflationary episode seemed unlikely.##NewTopic##Money, credit, demand and output##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, overall GDP growth in the fourth quarter was unrevised, in the second release, at .% at market prices and .% at basic prices. Surveys remained strong, though less consistently so than a month ago, and still suggested growth of over % in the first quarter of . Revisions to earlier data had raised the estimated level of GDP at basic prices by around .% by the fourth quarter, with much of this revision falling in the first half of the year. Interpreted mechanically, this implied an equal reduction in spare capacity. But the Committee s view on capacity was based on a wider range of considerations; other information on capacity, and the fact that past inflation was unchanged, argued against such an interpretation. This month s special survey of capacity utilisation by the Bank s regional Agents indicated few pressure points; indeed, it suggested that there might be##NewPara##rather more scope for average hours of work to increase, should the need arise, than had been allowed for in the Committee s February projections.##NewPara##The back revisions had also changed the estimated composition of demand. Investment was now estimated to have been .% higher than previously thought, by the third quarter of , and final domestic demand .% higher. The revised investment data suggested a less erratic, and potentially more sustainable, return to investment growth during . This and the recent weakness in inventories, which was likely to prove temporary, suggested a rather stronger outlook for demand in the coming quarters.##NewPara##The estimated level of consumption had also been revised up, by .% by the third quarter. Consumption was now estimated to have grown by around % in each of the past three quarters. That rapid pace of growth seemed set to continue into the first quarter of . Retail sales had grown by .% in January, following .% growth in December. Early indications were that spending growth would remain quite strong into February. There was no sign of weakening in consumer confidence; and though the latest CBI Distributive Trades survey pointed to a modest slowing in growth on the month, the three-month average was at its highest since June . The housing market too remained strong, with house price inflation (on the main lenders  indices) higher in the three months to February than in the three months to November. Evidence from the RICS survey was rather more mixed, with a small fall in the price expectations balance but an increase in the ratio of sales to stocks   a good indicator of near-term price developments.##NewPara##Total lending to individuals was growing at some % on an annual basis. Loan approvals for house purchase had again fallen a little, but new purchasers would continue to underpin borrowing growth, as they replaced existing owners whose housing-related debt had been taken on when house prices were much lower. The income gearing implied by current and prospective indebtedness, if interest rates followed the trajectory implied by market forward rates, would reach levels last seen in the early s within two or three years. A key difference, however, was that this increase could be anticipated, as it was not the result of unexpected policy changes but simply reflected the expected increase in the stock of debt and the interest rate path expected by the market to be consistent with achieving the inflation target. Nevertheless, households might not have taken the prospective increases in interest rates fully into account.##NewPara##The continued strength of consumption growth was unexpected. Real post-tax wages per head had been growing quite modestly over the past year, indeed on some measures they had actually fallen in the second quarter of ; but employment was growing and non-wage components had made a strong contribution to household income growth in the second and third quarters of . Changes in tax credits had been implemented in recent quarters, and take-up had exceeded expectations; that and the new pension credit, which was introduced in October , would continue to be a factor in households  spending decisions for a while yet. It was possible that these fiscal changes had particularly benefited households with a high marginal propensity to consume, and so were having a greater effect on consumption growth than had previously been allowed for in the Committee s projections.##NewPara##The strength of the housing market was less easy to explain. It was understandable that secured lending should be growing rapidly: new borrowers needed to finance increasingly large mortgages; lenders had been competing aggressively for market share; and refinancing was more common than in previous upswings, and was associated with top-up lending. In addition, the incomes of those likely to become owner-occupiers had grown faster than average incomes, so the increase in aggregate measures of income gearing might overstate increases at household level. But it was still surprising that prices were continuing to increase so strongly. It was possible that some of this strength simply reflected the balance between demand for and supply of housing. Another possible explanation was that investment demand for houses had increased: residential property might have become more attractive simply as an asset, particularly to hold as an investment for retirement income, given the disappointing performance of the equity market over several recent years and of with-profits life policies, even though the demand for housing services might not have increased.##NewPara##Against these stronger aspects of the UK demand picture, it was important to recognise that the higher level of sterling would weaken the United Kingdom s net trade position.##NewTopic##The labour market, costs and prices##NewPara##There was little sign of inflationary pressures in either the labour market or in goods markets. The employment rate was a little lower in the fourth quarter than in the third, but so too was unemployment; and, over the year as a whole, total hours worked were little changed while numbers employed had increased. The CIPS surveys of employment suggested rather stronger recent employment growth and were not easy to reconcile with the official data   not least because they##NewPara##excluded the public sector, which accounted for a substantial part of recent employment growth. Part of the explanation might lie in the fact that the surveys related only to employees and, even on the official data, employee numbers had fallen less fast in the second half of  than in the first. The surveys might also under-record the losses of jobs in firms which had closed (though that would suggest higher inflows into unemployment   and inflows had in fact been falling steadily).##NewPara##Conversely, the Labour Force Survey might under-record employment of workers who had recently arrived in the United Kingdom from overseas.##NewPara##The news on pay was mixed. Earnings growth in the public sector was slowing quite quickly, and by more than could easily be accounted for by the effects on the data of previous delayed pay settlements; and recent pay awards in the public sector were lower than a year earlier. But in the private sector, earnings growth had picked up in the second half of the year and pay settlements continued to move higher. Bonuses, however, had been surprisingly weak in December   the first month of what had been expected to be a rather more buoyant season for financial sector bonuses. It was too early to tell whether this was simply a matter of timing, such that the expected bonuses would be paid in the coming months, or reflected more widespread weakness in the sector s bonus payments than many had been expecting. Despite weakness in the insurance industry, the overall performance of the financial sector over the past year had been strong. There were also indications that some December bonuses had been paid in a way which exploited a tax loophole that had since been closed, so the payroll-based data might not fully reflect the bonuses actually paid.##NewPara##CPI inflation was .% in the year to January , in line with the Committee s expectations. It was expected to remain at about this rate for the next three months. Services price inflation had eased a little but remained robust, while goods price inflation   though rising   was still weak. As in##NewPara##some other countries, goods price inflation at the retail level was weaker than the corresponding output price inflation. In the United Kingdom s case, marked recent variations in the gap between these two measures was in part accounted for by changes in seasonal food prices, and by unusual movements in the price of cars associated with the Competition Commission investigation during  and .##NewPara##But a pronounced gap remained, even after discounting these factors. It might reflect a squeeze on distributors  and retailers  margins.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##In the Reuters survey of economists, only one of the  sampled this month expected that the repo rate would be increased; the mean probability attached to an increase was %.##NewPara##The Committee noted that the Chancellor s annual Budget statement would be made on  March.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The latest data on the world economy suggested that activity was no stronger, and perhaps a little weaker than had been expected a month ago, with the US recovery broadly on track but the latest euro- area data somewhat softer than anticipated. Growth in Asia remained robust. The main news on the month for the UK economy was, on the one hand, the marked appreciation of sterling, which would weaken the prospects for net trade; and, on the other, the stronger recent picture of domestic demand provided by the latest estimates of GDP, together with the continued strength of retail sales growth and buoyancy of the housing market. It seemed unlikely that upward revisions to the estimated level of GDP at basic prices contained much news about the degree of spare capacity. Overall, the prospect remained one of a steady pickup in CPI inflation towards target, as the gap between actual and potential output closed.##NewPara##Against this background, there were several arguments for raising the repo rate this month, to which members gave different weights. First, UK final domestic demand in general, and consumption in particular, were growing more strongly than previously thought and seemed likely to continue to do so, at least in the near term. That would reinforce the expected gradual build-up in inflationary pressure. The Committee s February central projections had envisaged that consumption growth would slow markedly in the first half of this year and would continue at a more modest pace thereafter. The revised data for  and the latest information on retail sales, combined with the continued buoyancy of the housing market and the steady recovery in the equities market, made that slowing seem a less likely near-term prospect. Second, for some members, the pickup in house price inflation and the continued rapid accumulation of debt by households increased their concerns that, without policy action, households  financial position could become unsustainable and so increase the probability of an eventual abrupt adjustment process, complicating the achievement of the inflation target. On that view, an increase in the repo rate now might reduce such risks. One member judged##NewPara##that an immediate rise might have a greater impact on household behaviour and delay might entail a larger increase in the repo rate at a later date. Third, it was arguable that policy should discount the impact of sterling s appreciation directly on sterling import prices and so on the UK price level. The balance of news about domestically generated inflation since February was arguably to the upside.##NewPara##There was, however, a good case for making no change to the repo rate this month, although for some members the decision was finely balanced. The news on the month would not materially raise the Committee s February central projection for inflation (though the upside risks, especially to consumption growth, had probably increased). That projection had implied that, in the absence of shocks, a gradual rise in the repo rate would be necessary over the forecast horizon to keep CPI inflation at target in the medium term. The projection based on the market yield curve had been consistent with below-target inflation throughout the forecast period. Against that background, to raise the repo rate at this month s meeting would be a surprise, which might prompt an unwarranted re- evaluation of the Committee s strategy by market participants and might as a result generate further upward pressure on sterling. Inflationary pressures could be expected to build over the forecast horizon, but they had not yet done so sufficiently to warrant a further increase in the repo rate.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.