The international environment##NewPara##The Committee discussed the international environment against the background of its August Inflation Report. It agreed that the outlook for Japan and the rest of Asia had not changed much since its July meeting; the Japanese economy was certainly no better, and if anything perhaps slightly worse. By contrast Europe was still thought likely to grow in line with the May forecast assumptions.##NewPara##The US economy was key to global prospects, and members noted that while growth had so far broadly followed the path expected in May, the uncertainties about the outlook had increased. Output growth had slowed somewhat in Q, reflecting weaker net trade and stockbuilding contributions. But domestic demand growth remained strong, and continued rises in employment and earnings were sustaining growth in real personal disposable incomes. The outlook was potentially vulnerable to sudden change. The rate of broad money growth was still rising and unemployment was at historically low levels, possibly below the natural rate. It was accordingly plausible that domestically generated inflationary pressures were increasing. Headline inflation had perhaps so far been held down by benign external conditions and a strong dollar, as well as the high credibility of the Fed, which faced a delicate task in balancing domestic and international considerations.##NewPara##Two particular risks were identified. First, that the US economy would turn down sharply in the face of an actual or expected tightening of monetary policy. Second, even in the absence of tighter monetary conditions, the equity market might fall. Equity prices were regarded by some commentators as reflecting highly optimistic expectations of corporate earnings growth as well as a much reduced##NewPara##equity risk premium (the extent to which equities were required to yield a higher return than government bonds on account of more uncertain returns). Arguably the fall in the days leading up to the Committee s meeting had increased the risk of a substantial fall in equity prices. But just as the probability and the scale of any market fall were uncertain, so were the consequences if it occurred. The macroeconomic impact of the large fall in October  had in the event been small, although it was difficult to judge to what extent this was in fact due to offsetting effects from the loosening of monetary policy. However, the pattern of equity ownership had changed materially since then, partly through the growth of mutual funds, which had increased the personal sector s near-direct holdings of equities. It was therefore possible that an equity market fall would now hit consumer confidence and consumption via reduced wealth more than had been the case in the past.##NewPara##The Committee felt that the balance of risks relating to future activity in the US and Japan were on the downside of the August central projection. It had therefore incorporated in its forecast a downside risk to UK output growth, and hence to inflation, from weaker than expected world activity in  and .##NewPara##Also in the context of the external environment, the Committee noted that input price pressures remained benign because of further falls in world commodity prices and the continuing adjustment of import prices to sterling s past appreciation.##NewTopic##Pace of the domestic slowdown so far##NewPara##The Committee agreed that there was now clear evidence that the economy had been slowing over the past year. The annualised growth rate of GDP had fallen from .% and .% through the first and second halves of  respectively to an ONS estimate of .% in  H. Growth in final domestic demand (ie excluding stockbuilding) had fallen from .% in  H to .% in  H, and probably further in  H given the indicators of Q demand so far available (for example, retail sales and car registrations).##NewPara##Within total output, services growth had fallen from .% (annualised) in  H to .% in  H. Manufacturing output growth was now at best flat. Within total final domestic demand, there were signs that retail sales growth had slowed, although some members of the Committee thought this could be attributed at least in part to recent bad weather and other special factors (eg the World##NewPara##Cup). Data on housing market activity - and closely related items of consumer spending - suggested a slight easing in demand pressures.##NewPara##The Committee had projected a slowdown in domestic demand in its previous inflation forecasts but at that point there had still been considerable uncertainty as to whether it was underway. That uncertainty was now convincingly resolved. The slowdown also seemed so far to be less unevenly distributed across the different sectors of the economy than had previously been expected.##NewPara##There remained, however, considerable uncertainty about the level of activity relative to the economy s productive capacity. One of the puzzles in the latter part of  had been the persistent strength of surveys compared with the official data. It was still possible that the ONS estimates of past activity and demand might have under-recorded the strength of the economy. The Committee noted that there would be many changes to the National Accounts in September, including rebasing, implementation of the new European System of Accounts, and a new Inter-Departmental Business Register: it would need carefully to examine all of these changes as well as the usual revisions as further information became available to the ONS.##NewTopic##Indicators of future growth##NewPara##More recently, and especially just prior to the Committee s July meeting, a series of surveys had suggested that there had been a sharp fall in business, and somewhat less so in consumer, confidence. For example, the MORI index of consumer confidence had fallen from + in May to - in June, while the GFK measure had fallen from +. in June to -. in July. In surveys of manufacturing, the BCC, CIPS and CBI measures had deteriorated materially over the quarter, with all appearing consistent with falling activity. The services sector measures - for example the CIPS activity and new business indices - generally signalled continuing growth, but at a slower pace than in April. (The Committee noted that there were still far fewer surveys of the services sector than of the smaller manufacturing sector.)##NewPara##Interpretation of the survey evidence was felt to be difficult. First, it was not clear what had triggered the apparent sharp change in sentiment. One possibility was that the Committee s June tightening, which had surprised financial markets, had induced a changed perception of the likely path of monetary policy. There was some support for this in the reaction of markets to subsequent earnings data, as the Committee had highlighted the pick up in earnings growth as one of the main factors behind its June decision. Alternatively, the lagged effects of past monetary tightenings and sterling s##NewPara##appreciation might now be becoming more obviously apparent to consumers and businesses. Another possibility, which could not be dismissed out of hand, was that the confidence indicators - and the publicity surrounding them - were in some degree feeding on each other.##NewPara##A second issue was whether, in addition to giving signals on the direction of the economy, the surveys provided information on the likely scale and speed of the slowdown. Few surveys had been in existence long enough for a robust view to be reached on this; many had not yet seen one complete business cycle. The CBI Business Optimism measure did, however, seem to have been a reasonable leading indicator in recent cycles. Taken on its own, it appeared to indicate a sharp downturn inactivity.##NewPara##Moving on to other evidence, the Committee noted that the messages about activity conveyed by the Bank s regional Agents had also become bleaker. Most striking was the sense that the downturn was not restricted to parts of the country with a proportionally large manufacturing presence and was extending to southern England. Some of the considerations bearing on the surveys applied here too, but the Agents  evidence nevertheless broadly corroborated a steeper and more broadly based slowdown than previously expected.##NewPara##Finally, the rise in the number of profit warnings issued by quoted companies also suggested an accelerating slowdown. Some of the downside risks to equity prices incorporated in the May Inflation Report seemed to be materialising. The Committee agreed that the downside risks remained, particularly in the light of apparently greater fragility in the US equity market. Consumption would, however, tend to be supported by the effects of past equity price increases and projected robust labour income growth.##NewPara##Overall, the economy had so far slowed broadly in line with the Committee s May forecast. The short-run outlook for activity was now slightly weaker than assumed in May and, given the recent surveys, the downside risks had probably increased .##NewTopic##Labour market conditions##NewPara##While recent demand and activity data and survey indicators made it clear that the economy was slowing, the sustained above-trend growth of previous years was putting accumulating pressures on capacity. In particular, further increases in the demand for labour had become more of a concern in recent months. On the LFS measures, employment had risen in the three months to May compared with the previous three months, while the unemployment rate had fallen to .% in May. Employment intentions, as measured by surveys, remained strong in the services sector, but were falling in manufacturing. According to the British Chambers of Commerce, recruitment difficulties were at a record high in both sectors in Q. There were, however, some signs of easing in recent data: the claimant unemployment count had risen for the second month running to .% in June, and the CBI had recorded fewer reports of skill shortages in manufacturing in its July survey.##NewPara##More striking was the sharp rise in measures of earnings growth during the spring, as discussed at the Committee s June and July meetings. Headline whole-economy average earnings growth in the three months centred on April was .% (private sector .%, public sector .%), having increased from .% (revised up from .%) in January. The amounts identified by respondents to the ONS survey as  irregular pay , which seemed likely to represent mainly bonuses, contributed . percentage points to the . percentage point increase in annual average earnings growth over the year to April , suggesting that the acceleration of labour costs was only to a degree the result of increasing bonuses.##NewPara##The Committee noted that the increasing importance of bonuses and profit/performance-related pay in remuneration complicated the assessment of labour market conditions. In particular, since most firms paid bonuses in a single month, the bonus contribution had to be smoothed over the year to obtain a measure of the underlying change in earnings growth. This required an assumption about the rate of growth in bonus payments over the coming twelve months. Assuming that bonuses continued to increase at the same rate as over the past year, underlying earnings growth in May was .%, calculated on this basis. If, on the other hand, bonus growth fell to % by , the smoothed earnings growth figure for May would be around .%; and for zero bonus growth by January , the figure was .%. The assumption about future bonus growth was therefore an important element in judging current underlying earnings growth, although it was noted that since  earnings growth had picked up steadily on any measure.##NewPara##Views varied amongst Committee members about the best assumption. On one view, past bonus growth reflected rapid growth in corporate profits and revenue, which was unlikely to continue through##NewPara##- given the activity slowdown underway. On another view, bonus growth was in part a symptom of a tight labour market, with firms having to pay up to recruit and keep labour.##NewPara##The Committee discussed arguments advanced in the press that the official numbers materially overstated the rate of earnings growth because of the way bonuses were treated, and that there had been no real acceleration in earnings. But even on evidence as presented there had clearly been an increase in the rate of earnings growth.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the twelve-month and three-month annualised measures of settlements growth. The twelve-month employment-weighted mean for the whole economy was .% in Q, up from .% in Q, while the three-month mean settlement had fallen from .% to .% over the same period. The twelve-month rate could potentially mislead as it reflected settlements agreed up to a year ago, and so possibly before the prospect of a slowdown had become widely apparent. However, the three-month measure was probably more misleading. Different firms settled in different months, so that the range of employers included in the three-month measure changed from month to month. In particular, the timing of public sector settlements distorted the three-month measure.##NewPara##There was a range of views on the likely pace of future earnings growth, but members agreed that the labour market was tighter, and thus upward pressures on earnings were greater, than a quarter ago. One view was that the prospective slowdown in demand and output would dampen earnings growth, which was a lagging indicator of the economy. Another was that there would be continuing increases. In particular, there was a risk that public sector pay would start to catch up with the private sector, as discussed at previous meetings. The slowdown in domestic demand might, though, reduce the ability of firms to pass higher labour costs into prices, which the Committee agreed to reflect in its central projection.##NewPara##The Committee also discussed recently published research suggesting that official estimates understated productivity, and so overstated unit labour cost growth, in manufacturing. Members noted that the research was specific to manufacturing and had no implications for the accuracy of official estimates of productivity and unit labour costs in the whole economy, which was the Committee s##NewPara##focus. The authors of the research had said that any errors in the measures of manufacturing were likely to be offset by countervailing errors in the measures for other industry groups.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the implications for inflation of the National Minimum Wage due to take effect from April ; a Box on the MPC s analysis would appear in the August Inflation Report. The introduction of the National Minimum Wage (NMW) was akin to a price level shock. It would raise the price level, with a temporary impact on inflation. There was an upside risk that there would be more restoration of wage differentials than assumed in the central projection. Faster earnings growth in  and  than had been assumed in May, together with the NMW, would change the profile of the central projection of RPIX inflation, in the direction of making it humped rather than saucer-shaped.##NewTopic##Fiscal policy##NewPara##The Committee discussed the implications for the inflation outlook of the latest Government spending announcements (in the Economic and Fiscal Strategy Report and the Comprehensive Spending Review). Fiscal policy had been progressively tightened in recent years. Following the latest announcements, the starting point in the EFSR was a somewhat lower fiscal deficit in / than in the March Budget and May Inflation Report. There appeared to be an increase in current as well as in public investment spending from / onwards compared with the illustrative assumptions in the March Budget. The March Budget had, though, still effected reductions in forecast future deficits compared to /. It was observed that the budget balance was not by itself a complete measure of the macroeconomic impact of fiscal policy, which was also affected by changes in the level and composition of planned expenditure. These changes were reflected in the central projection.##NewTopic##Monetary conditions##NewPara##The Committee noted that the rate of growth of most of the money and credit numbers had fallen over both the quarter and the latest month, and quite markedly since the peaks in . Compared with May, there were clearer signs that monetary growth had eased. However, with the possible exception of narrow money, whose three-month annualised rate of growth was around % in July, further falls were needed in the absence of persuasive reasons to expect continuing strong negative velocity growth. On one view, additional risks were posed by a possible liquidity overhang from cumulative past rapid broad money growth.##NewPara##Consumer credit had continued to rise very rapidly. It seemed that, notwithstanding the increases in official rates, intense competition had prevented interest rates from rising on unsecured credit##NewPara##products over the past year or so. It was unclear what if any implications this had for future consumption growth, particularly given that mortgage equity withdrawal had been negative in recent quarters.##NewPara##As regards price indicators of monetary conditions, the Bank staff s estimates of short maturity real interest rates suggested a fall over the past month but a rise since May, mainly owing to the change since the June tightening in expected future official rates. However, sterling had fallen over both the past month and compared with the May Inflation Report assumption.##NewTopic##Other forecasts of inflation##NewPara##The Committee reviewed information collected up to the meeting on other forecasts; as usual the completed survey would be summarised in the Inflation Report. So far, the averages for RPIX inflation in  Q,  Q and  Q were .%, .% and .% respectively; and for GDP growth they were .%, .% and .%. These forecasts did, of course, make a variety of assumptions about the path of interest rates and the exchange rate.##NewTopic##The MPC’s August forecast##NewPara##On the Committee s own forecast, which is described fully in the Inflation Report published in the week following the meeting, the near-term outlook for output growth was weaker than in May. As in previous quarters there was a negative contribution from net trade through much of the forecast period, but this was smaller than in May due to sterling s slight fall over the quarter and a steeper future depreciation being assumed in the central projection, reflecting a widening in interest rate differentials. The official figures for investment in  and  having been revised up, the Committee decided to reduce its forecast of investment growth, and so domestic demand growth, over the forecast period. Overall, therefore, in the central projection output growth fell below trend before rising as the fall in net exports came to an end and as planned government spending picked up.##NewPara##The inflation profile reflected the adverse news on earnings since May, which on its own implied a worse rate of inflation for a given rate of output growth (a worse short-run nominal/real trade-off). Not all members agreed with this interpretation of the earnings data. The alternative view was that the bonus elements of earnings was likely to slow as activity slowed. However, in the central projection, earnings now accelerated by more than assumed in May, and the effect of the National Minimum Wage##NewPara##on the price level added to nominal earnings growth in the shorter run. Inflationary pressures would, however, subside somewhat as the economy slowed and unemployment rose. The central projection was thus for RPIX inflation to rise into  before falling back.##NewPara##The net effect of these influences was that the central projection for RPIX was above the .% target until the end of the forecast period; and that May s saucer-shaped forecast was succeeded by a forecast with a hump. The balance of risks to inflation were on the upside towards the end of the period through, amongst other things, the possibility of a greater sterling depreciation than assumed in the central projection.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee first discussed to what extent it should weigh in its policy decision not only the medium-term outlook for inflation but also the hump in inflation which it was forecasting in the first half of .##NewPara##On one argument, the Committee should be concerned with the profile for inflation over the entire horizon at which current policy was likely to have some impact on inflation, not solely on the two-year ahead prospect. The central projection for inflation in the August Inflation Report was above the target throughout the entire forecast period, except at the two year horizon, with the prospect of a subsequent rise in inflation as domestic demand growth picked up. Moreover the balance of risks to inflation was on the upside. To eliminate the anticipated hump in inflation completely might require too much volatility in output in the short-run. Nevertheless, it would be appropriate to reduce that hump somewhat by a further immediate tightening of monetary policy. This would also help to bring down inflation at longer horizons. The inflation projection implied that over the two year horizon, in order to meet the inflation target, an increase in interest rates was more likely to be necessary than a cut. There were no pressing arguments for delaying an increase, and so an immediate increase was called for.##NewPara##On another argument, the lags in monetary policy were such that raising rates to reduce the expected but uncertain hump in inflation in  would raise output volatility without directly improving the medium-term outlook for inflation. This argument pointed to not raising interest rates immediately.##NewPara##Turning to the implications for policy of the overall outlook for inflation, the Committee identified arguments for raising rates, for leaving them at .%, and for cutting rates.##NewPara##The arguments for raising rates were as follows. The central projection for inflation was above the target throughout the forecast period, except at the  year horizon. The risks to inflation were, moreover, on the upside throughout - and especially towards the end of - the forecast period, so that the mean projection of inflation was above   % throughout the forecast period. On one view, it seemed likely, notwithstanding the considerable uncertainties, that inflation would be increasing beyond the two-year horizon, as the effects of sterling s appreciation on net trade wore off and as the impact of government spending on domestic demand came through. Thus, just as inflation outturns had persistently been above target in the past, it was more likely than not that inflation would be above target in the foreseeable future. This would be damaging to credibility, and called for an immediate##NewPara## basis point rise.##NewPara##The arguments for a cut in rates were as follows. Current monetary conditions were already tight. Real short-term interest rates were probably in the range   -% and the exchange rate was being held up partly by market expectations of official interest rates being set at the current level (or even higher) for some time. The downturn in the economy now becoming evident in the data was largely the effect of the monetary tightening put in place a year or so ago and the past appreciation of sterling.  So far the downturn was moderate, but the more recent monetary tightenings were yet to have their maximum effect, and there were some ominous signs in the survey evidence and from the Bank s regional Agents that the decline in output growth might be about to steepen.##NewPara##On this view these arguments pointed to an immediate, but small, reduction in interest rates, both to bring down their level directly and also to signal that official rates had probably peaked. Further support for this view came from a lower inflation forecast based on an alternative interpretation of bonus payments and earnings growth which assumed no change in the short-term nominal/real trade -off from that in the May projection. In that case it was unlikely that a  basis points reduction in rates would be enough to prevent inflation from being below target, especially if the downside risks of a deeper prolonged impact from the Asian crisis materialised. But there were arguments against a larger cut at this point. Domestically, there were some offsetting upward risks to inflation. Medium-term inflationary pressures had increased because of the introduction of the minimum wage and because of the expansionary effect of higher planned government expenditure. There was also a risk of further earnings acceleration, although on this view it would not be possible for producers to pass much of that##NewPara##through to prices in the current environment. It was therefore desirable to reduce rates by  basis points now and then wait to see how earnings and prices developed before bringing rates down further.##NewPara##The arguments for leaving rates at .% were as follows. The slowdown in activity and demand so far was broadly in line with the Committee s earlier forecasts, resolving the earlier uncertainty about whether a turning point had been reached. The downturn also appeared so far to be somewhat more balanced than previously expected. On the other hand, the earnings data were clearly worse than expected in May, implying that the short-run nominal/real trade off had deteriorated. That would probably continue for a while, and was reflected in the Committee s forecast. While the risks to inflation were on balance on the upside, there were downside risks. In particular the forecast of consumption growth depended in part on private sector wealth and thus on the course of the equity market, which had recently become more rather than less uncertain. And the recent striking fall in consumer and business confidence, evidenced by surveys and the Bank s regional Agents, signalled downside risks to activity and inflation. These risks might be greater than reflected in the forecast. For example, the downturn might prove sharp enough to prevent the forecast rise in earnings growth being passed through into prices in the short run, although that would tend to increase latent price pressures beyond the two-year horizon, since margins would probably be rebuilt at some stage. In sum, given that inflation was forecast to be close to the target in two years  time and that the outlook beyond then was highly uncertain, the Committee could sensibly wait to gather more information before concluding that policy needed to be changed.##NewPara##The Governor invited members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be left unchanged this month. Seven members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, David Clementi, Alan Budd, Charles Goodhart, Ian Plenderleith and John Vickers) voted for the proposition, and two (Willem Buiter and DeAnne Julius) voted against. Willem Buiter preferred an immediate rise in interest rates and DeAnne Julius an immediate cut.