The world economy##NewPara##The Committee discussed whether there had been any material changes to the world economic outlook, or in the balance of risks, since its May Inflation Report. Recent data suggested that the US economy was slowing; GDP growth had fallen from .% in  Q to .% in  Q, a weaker outturn than widely expected. Taken together with a lower equity market and a slight fall in consumer confidence, this suggested that the probability of a  soft landing  had increased. Some doubts were, however, expressed about this. First, much of the fall in output growth between Q and Q was accounted for by inventory changes, which might unwind. Second, whether or not a soft landing was achieved might depend on labour market developments. There were signs that recent benign outcomes for productivity and unit labour costs might be fading. That could in turn lead to a tightening of monetary policy. Taking these points together, there remained a risk of the US economy slowing more sharply than assumed in the Committee s central projection, particularly if equity prices fell.##NewPara##In the euro area, the backward looking data generally remained weak. Area-wide industrial production had fallen again in May, although output growth in a number of the smaller economies - for example Spain, Netherlands, Belgium - was stronger than had been expected by most commentators. Forward-looking indicators had strengthened somewhat, but were still mixed. On the one hand, there were signs that business sentiment had improved in the largest economies; for example, the IFO survey in Germany and the INSEE survey in France had both risen strongly in June. On the other hand, surveys for each of France, Germany and Italy suggested that orders were still falling, implying that some downside risks persisted. The Committee noted that various ECB statements had been taken by the market to suggest that monetary policy was more likely to be tightened than eased. It seemed that this was against a background of stronger growth in the monetary aggregates and rising energy prices, and could reflect a judgment that the amount of cyclical slack in the euro-area economy was smaller than might be inferred from the level of unemployment.##NewPara##It now seemed less likely that Japanese GDP growth would fall by as much in  Q as had been thought the previous month. More generally, the downside risks were not yet materialising. It was also possible that, if they did, the Japanese government would employ fiscal policy to try to offset any weakening in aggregate demand. However, worries remained. It was unclear how potential problems in the insurance sector might be resolved and whether and how they might affect the economic outlook. Market commentators had expressed concerns about the yen, which had risen against the dollar over the previous month after the earlier efforts to hold it down via exchange market intervention.##NewPara##Taken as a whole the crisis-affected emerging market economies continued to recover. But the environment remained fragile, as evidenced by the generalised rise in interest rate spreads since the May Inflation Report. Financial markets were, in particular, discounting some possibility of a Chinese devaluation, although on the whole commentators seemed to think that unlikely this year. There also seemed to be renewed worries about Korea. Partly against a background of uncertainty about official policy towards corporate restructuring, the equity market had fallen around % following the announcement of problems at Daewoo, although the market had subsequently recovered. There remained a longer-term downside risk to the world economic outlook from the slow pace and gradual effect of corporate and financial sector reform in emerging market economies.##NewPara##Overall, compared with May, the Committee had raised its central projection for world output growth, but the balance of risks was on the downside. Some risks to the outlook - for example, a sharp fall in world equity markets or a resumption of severe problems in emerging market economies - could not sensibly be anticipated by UK monetary policy, but rather the Committee would need to consider how to react if and when such contingencies occurred.##NewPara##The Committee noted that world price inflation had typically been coming out lower than expected given the path of world output growth. This was partly attributable to there having for some time been stronger than expected falls in oil and commodity prices. That was less likely in the period ahead given the projected pick-up in world economic growth. Oil prices had already risen sharply.##NewTopic##Monetary and financial conditions##NewPara##The twelve-month rate of aggregate broad money growth had fallen to .% in June, the lowest since March . However, the aggregate data masked considerable sectoral differences. Most of the slowdown was accounted for by a fall in sterling deposits held by other financial institutions. By##NewPara##contrast, annual household M growth, at .% in  Q, was the highest for almost two years. Household borrowing was also accelerating; the % growth in the year to  Q was the highest since  Q. Mortgage lending had picked up and approvals were still strong.##NewPara##The twelve-month growth rate of M had reached .% in July, with the annualised three-month rate at .%. In part this was attributable to the earlier reductions in nominal interest rates, which would be expected to reduce the velocity of circulation of non-interest bearing money balances. But, taken together with the broad money and credit numbers, it also seemed to corroborate the quickening pace of household sector spending growth seen in recent consumption data and in surveys.##NewPara##There had still been only limited pass through into headline mortgage and deposit rates of the Committee s most recent interest rate reductions. Views differed on the reliability of headline rates as indicators of the interest rates at which lending and borrowing business was actually occuring, with some Committee members noting the apparent intensification of competition - and increases in special, non-headline deals - in these markets.##NewPara##The sterling interest rate curve had continued to steepen out to around three years, so that it was now distinctly humped. Since April, the three-month interbank rate implied by the June  short sterling futures contract had risen by about  basis points; the rate implied by the September  contract had risen  basis points over the previous month. Market comment had suggested that the curve might have been distorted by some large transactions in thin markets, in which case it was possible that the effect would be temporary and that market rates were not accurately reflecting market expectations of the future path of official interest rates. Nevertheless, business was conducted at those rates, and so the steepening represented a degree of tightening in monetary and credit conditions.##NewPara##In this connection, it was suggested that the effect on the economic outlook of the increase in medium maturity market rates might be greater than reflected in the Bank s projections; it was unclear how the term structure of interest rates affected consumption and investment spending. Separately, the Committee noted that a projection for inflation using market interest rates was on this occasion materially below the one assuming a constant official interest rate.##NewPara##The sterling exchange rate index stood at ., compared with . implied by the May projection modal path. The fifteen day average - the starting point for the August forecast - was .. As had been discussed at the Committee s previous meeting, it still seemed that sterling was less tightly##NewPara##tied to the dollar than a few months earlier. The euro had also continued to strengthen, for which two possible explanations were identified. First, expected euro-area monetary conditions might have tightened on account of stronger expected euro-area growth and ECB statements. Second, the euro s recent recovery might reflect a reduced risk premium. During  the Committee had attributed part of sterling s strength against  In  currencies to the inevitable uncertainties about how the single monetary policy would operate, with an expectation that some of this risk premium in sterling s favour##NewPara##would erode as familiarity with the ECB increased.If so, the euro might continue to strengthen against sterling, and by more than implied by interest rate differentials. In the view of some members, there were other reasons why sterling might depreciate by more than uncovered-interest parity implied. The increased UK trade deficit would put downward pressure on the real exchange rate which, given inflation prospects in the UK and abroad, implied the likelihood of a lower nominal rate.##NewPara##However, views differed on the likely path of sterling. Most members supported continuing to use the convention of uncovered-interest parity in the central projection, under which the path of sterling would be linked to market interest rate differentials, adjusted for the forecast convention of a constant sterling interest rate. Some members, however, preferred to use the alternative convention of a constant sterling ERI over the forecast period, on a view that the least-bad hypothesis for forecasting exchange rate behaviour was a random walk. It was noted that no methods or conventions for forecasting the exchange rate had a good record. The alternative approach would reduce the central projection for inflation by around . percentage points at the two-year forecast horizon, and the output growth central projection by about . percentage points.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##There had been some significant changes to the national accounts data. They now showed that the slowdown in  Q and  Q, when output growth had been flat, was accounted for entirely by changes in stocks and net trade. Final domestic demand (ie excluding investment in stocks) had continued to grow strongly.##NewPara##The quarterly rate of output growth was back to .% in  Q, the same as from  Q to  Q, and slightly faster than had been in assumed in the Committee s May central projection. Manufacturing output had grown by .% in Q, the first quarterly increase for a year. Compared with May, there was thus harder evidence of the recovery since the winter. Forward-looking survey data had also continued to strengthen. The quarterly CBI Business Optimism balance had risen from - in April##NewPara##to + in July, above the long term average. The CIPS manufacturing output index was  in July, the fourth consecutive month it had been above  and its highest level since March . The CIPS services output index was  in July, the highest since April . Indicators of household expenditure were robust.  For example, retail sales were stronger than expected in the second quarter.  House prices were rising faster than expected in May, although with considerable variation among the regions. For the country as a whole, the July Halifax index was up around % on a year ago, with most of the increase over the most recent period; the index was up % on a quarter ago and % on a month ago. Housing market activity indicators - particulars delivered and mortgage approvals - were also increasing. Not everything was strengthening, however. Consumer confidence, as measured by GfK, had fallen in July, for the first time since November . The Bank s regional Agents had reported that their contacts indicated that consumer demand might not be as firm as suggested by recent official data.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the possible implications of the very different picture that the official data now painted of the slowdown last year and the early part of this year. The persistent strength of final domestic demand was striking. It had earlier been thought that part of the background to the stock adjustment had been slowing consumer and business final demand. The latest data did not support that story. A number of possible explanations were identified. First, the latest data themselves might be revised. Second, monetary policy might have stabilised the path of final domestic demand growth. The tightening during  and into  might have dampened an acceleration otherwise underway; and the subsequent easing of policy in the US, UK and elsewhere might have offset the shocks from the emerging market crises and the sharp fall in business and consumer confidence in the autumn, by helping to prevent a credit crunch and restore confidence. Third, the monetary policy changes might not have had much effect at all, with confidence spontaneously recovering as the real economy adjusted to the autumn shocks. It was unclear which, if any, of these possible explanations was most plausible.##NewPara##Connected to this, views differed on whether the evidence suggested that the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism were now shorter. On one argument, the greater credibility of the new monetary regime might mean that monetary policy changes have a stronger impact on confidence, which may translate more quickly into spending decisions and pricing behaviour. On another argument, it was difficult to conclude whether or not monetary policy changes had in fact made much difference to the recent path of the economy, let alone whether there was evidence of a permanent and general change in the transmission mechanism. The shocks to the economy last autumn had been highly##NewPara##unusual. It was possible that monetary policy could work quickly in averting a credit crunch - restoring financial market stability and wider confidence - in those particular circumstances, but that the transmission mechanism had not changed more generally.##NewPara##Views also differed somewhat about the implications of the latest data for the outlook. On the one hand, it was possible that the economy was now on an even keel, recovering nicely towards trend. On the other hand, the economy could overheat if a recovery in stockbuilding, the planned pick up in public expenditure, and a smaller negative contribution to aggregate demand from net trade coincided with persistent final domestic demand strength, fuelled by rising house prices and official interest rates being significantly lower than before last autumn s disturbance.##NewPara##Overall, given the latest data, the Committee assumed faster consumption growth in its central projection than in May; and also faster house price growth, which would itself increase consumption growth somewhat. The balance of risks to the consumption profile were judged to be on the upside over the next year or so.##NewTopic##Labour market conditions##NewPara##The Committee had been predicting falling employment, but that had not happened despite the slowdown in activity. The unemployment rate had been almost flat, at around .% on the Labour Force Survey measure, since the middle of . Inactivity levels continued to fall.##NewPara##The labour market prices data posed some difficult and important puzzles against that background. The twelve month mean of private sector pay settlements was .%, compared with .% at the end of , and .% a year ago. Earnings growth, as measured by the twelve-month change in the Average Earnings Index, had fallen sharply in April and May, although it was difficult to assess the significance of this given that a lot of bonuses were paid in these months and bonuses were thought to be lower this year than last year. Data in subsequent months might provide clearer information on the underlying picture.##NewPara##While nominal earnings growth had fallen, it seemed that real earnings growth had been rising. This divergence between the paths of real and nominal growth might be explained by a fall in ex ante inflation expectations or by lower inflation outturns than were expected when wage bargains had been struck. However, although real earnings growth had risen relative to nominal earnings growth, it had##NewPara##still been lower than would have been predicted given the levels of employment and unemployment. This might suggest some degree of structural change in the labour market.##NewPara##There was, however, a range of views on the outlook for earnings. While the Committee as a whole agreed that real earnings growth would be slower, for any given output path, than assumed in May, there were differences on the appropriate size of adjustment to the May projection assumptions, hinging on differences on the extent of any structural changes. On one view, the adjustment made in the best collective central projection was too big. Labour markets conditions were tight. The BCC had reported continuing recruitment difficulties. The CBI had reported a slight increase in skill shortages, and the balance of manufacturing companies reporting shortages of unskilled labour were at the highest since . The Bank s regional Agents were also reporting that businesses were experiencing problems in hiring at the lower end of the skills range. On this view, the most likely outturn for RPIX would be . percentage points higher than the best collective central projection at the two year##NewPara##Another view placed weight on the fact that neither nominal earnings growth nor RPIX inflation had picked up over the year or so during which unemployment had been stable at around .%. This suggested that continuing structural reforms had had the effect of materially reducing the level of unemployment at which inflation would start to increase. In consequence, the outlook for earnings growth was more benign than assumed in the Committee s best collective central projection. On this view, the most likely outturn for RPIX at the two year horizon would be . percentage points lower.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##There had been continuing downward pressure on UK import prices from sterling s appreciation, but the rate of import price deflation was slowing. Non-oil commodity prices had, on the Bank index, risen by .% in the year to June, so that there had now been price rises for three consecutive months after thirty-three months of falling prices.##NewPara##Oil prices had increased by about % over the month to above $ per barrel, partly reflecting higher expected world economic growth. The Committee assumed a price of $ per barrel throughout the forecast period in the best collective central projection, higher than in May but with some unwinding of the most recent price increase. Some members preferred using $ per barrel either in the central##NewPara##projection or as an upside risk. This would add . percentage points to RPIX inflation at the end of the forecast horizon.##NewPara##The Committee debated the outlook for pricing behaviour in the economy. A majority did not want to make any changes to the assumptions made in the Committee s earlier projections. Some members, however, believed that there were significant changes underway in product markets via greater use of information technology in distribution, via the entry of large, low cost competitors, and via an intensification of competitive pressures driven by regulatory developments. They believed that these changes could bring about a structural reduction in the level of profit margins in some sectors. While the adjustment was occuring, inflation would be lower than would otherwise be the case for any given path of output growth and real earnings growth. On this view, RPIX inflation could be##NewPara##. percentage points lower at the two-year forecast horiz on than on the best collective central projection.##NewTopic##The August inflation and growth projections##NewPara##The Committee agreed the projections to be published in the Inflation Report on  August.##NewPara##On the assumption of constant official interest rates of .%, the best collective judgment of the central projection for output growth was for stronger growth than in the May Report. Growth was projected to get back to around trend by the end of this year, after which it continued rising to around %, where it levelled off.##NewPara##The Committee s best collective projection for RPIX had broadly the same saucer shape as in May, but with a number of differences. There was a lower starting point, and the trough of slightly below % was lower than in May. Inflation was projected to rise to above the   % target by the end of the two- year forecast period, when it was still increasing. The balance of risks was slightly on the upside.##NewPara##As already described, there was considerable uncertainty in the Committee about the inflation outlook, and there was a range of preferred assumptions for the central projection. Various members had different preferred assumptions for the path of the nominal exchange rate, earnings growth, pricing behaviour/profit margins, and the oil price; these were presented in Table .B on page  of the Inflation Report published on  August.##NewPara##Different members preferred different combinations of these assumptions. Some preferred assumptions that would lower the central projection at the two-year horizon by between . and . percentage points. Some preferred an assumption (on earnings growth) which would raise the central projection by . percentage points at that horizon.##NewPara##The Committee also reviewed the range of outside forecasts based on a variety of different assumptions. The mean forecast for RPIX inflation was .% for the twelve months to  Q, .% in  Q, and .% in  Q. While the mean shorter run forecast was lower than in the April survey, the  and  forecasts were higher. The probability assigned to inflation being above  % in  Q was just over %, higher than in May.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee agreed that there was much to welcome in the current conjuncture. Output growth was recovering back towards trend faster than had been expected. Unemployment was lower than for a long time. There was, however, great uncertainty in the Committee about the extent to which the recent improvement in the relationship between activity and price inflation would persist, and about whether the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism had become shorter. There was, accordingly, a wide range of views about the medium-term prospect for inflation, reflected in different members of the Committee having different preferred assumptions for the central projection; assuming a constant .% repo rate, there was a difference of about . percentage points between the highest and lowest inflation rates which individual members of the Committee thought most likely at the two-year forecast horizon.##NewPara##Against this background, different members of the Committee emphasised different aspects in reaching their policy judgments. Some members emphasised that the quarterly forecasting round was the occasion on which, notwithstanding the considerable uncertainties, all the factors influencing the inflation outlook could be weighed together and expressed in a coherent quantitative framework, with a disciplined - although not mechanical - link between a member s assessment of the outlook and their policy judgment, given the Committee s remit of an explicit inflation target. Others placed emphasis in addition on the increased uncertainty about the relationship between activity and price inflation, and about the transmission mechanism.##NewPara##For some members of the Committee, the question was whether or not there was a case for a further reduction in rates now. While most features of the conjuncture were welcome, inflation was below the target and set to remain so for some time. On this view, the most likely outlook for inflation was, furthermore, even weaker than implied by the best collective central projection. Those members taking this view placed weight, in different degrees, on alternative assumptions: a constant nominal exchange rate together with either weaker earnings growth or a downward adjustment to profit margins. One such member would also have preferred a number of other adjustments to the best collective central projection: in particular, slightly higher oil prices and slightly stronger consumption, offset to some extent by tighter than assumed monetary and credit conditions on account of the incomplete pass through of previous rate reductions and the steep rise in medium maturity market interest rates. Taken together, these considerations pointed towards a further reduction in interest rates. However, various arguments against an immediate reduction were identified. First, in the view of one member, the current nominal rate was around neutral, and the case for changing rates therefore had to be more compelling than usual given the inherent self-correcting characteristics of the economy. Second, nominal interest rates were lower than for many years so that, if there were residual inflation illusion or if borrowers were credit constrained, the upside risks to consumption growth might be greater than assumed. Third, there was considerable uncertainty about the outlook. That pointed towards caution in changing policy. In particular, there was a case for waiting to assess the extent to##NewPara##which the performance of the labour market had improved. Fourth, an immediate rate cut, which would be unexpected, might have a much larger-than-normal effect on house prices and sterling, which could have a significant impact on the resulting modal projection of inflation. Fifth, although some members preferred a modal projection for inflation a little below  % in two years  time, for some of them the balance of risks was on the upside. Overall, the best course this month was to leave rates unchanged.##NewPara##For some other members of the Committee, the question was more whether or not there was a case for tightening policy this month. Domestic demand growth was already stronger than expected and was projected to increase, with clear upside risks to consumer spending, particularly if house prices continued to rise sharply. It was unlikely that net trade would continue to make a negative contribution to output growth for much longer. There was a risk that output growth would not level off over the next year or so but would continue to increase. In any event, there could be upwards inflationary pressure at the end of the forecast period, when the best collective central projection was already above the  % target and rising. Some of the members who held these concerns about the risks to the inflation outlook would also have preferred a somewhat higher central projection for inflation as they##NewPara##thought the most likely path for earnings growth was faster than assumed. However, even with that adjustment the central projection would be below the target until  Q. Moreover, monetary and credit conditions had already tightened somewhat through the rise in medium term market interest rates. Taking these considerations together, although it seemed more likely than not that there would at some point need to be a tightening of monetary policy in order to meet the inflation target, the Committee was in a position to wait for more evidence. That might help to resolve some of the uncertainties about consumption; about earnings, where there would be data less affected by bonus payments; and about the length of the transmission lags and about pricing behaviour; as well as more evidence on the exchange rate. In consequence, there was time to take any restraining action later, if and when it was more clearly needed. Overall, for these members too, the best course this month was to leave rates unchanged.##NewPara##Other members placed less weight on the arguments for a further reduction or for a pre-emptive tightening. On the one hand, a cut would take imprudent risks with the pace of increase in household spending and with house prices. It could well be taken badly by the financial markets, leading to a rise in longer term inflation expectations and nominal bond yields. While inflation was set to be below the target for a period, that largely reflected the unexpected shocks to the world economy last autumn; monetary policy could not sensibly try to offset the short-run effects of all shocks as it had to be forward looking. It was conceivable that the relationship between activity and price inflation had become substantially more benign, but more evidence was needed; some past UK monetary policy mistakes had stemmed in part from over optimism about the possibility of permanent changes in the economy. On the other hand, a tightening would be premature and overly cautious, and could even prompt questions about whether the target was truly symmetric. The economy was recovering nicely, helped by the earlier easing of policy; and inflationary pressures were fairly muted in the short run. There were risks further out, but there was time to gather more evidence before any action was needed to dampen any incipient inflationary pressure. On this view too, the best course this month was to leave rates unchanged.##NewPara##The Governor invited the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.