Survey evidence, domestic demand, activity##NewPara##The evidence of a sharp slowdown in domestic output growth was strongest in the surveys and in reports from the Bank s regional Agencies. Both business and consumer confidence had continued to deteriorate during October. Survey indicators of export orders had been very weak for some time, but the domestic activity indicators had fallen sharply in the latest month, and this had extended to services as well as manufacturing; the CIPS measure of incoming new business, for example, was below , although business expectations remained quite buoyant. There had not been such an abrupt change in sentiment in manufacturing - as measured by the CBI Industrial Trends Survey of business optimism - since the early s. It was, however, difficult to make comparisons with the past as there were now many more surveys, mostly with relatively short histories.##NewPara##The Bank s regional Agents had for some time been indicating that the economy was slowing, but their reports over the past two months indicated a sharper slowdown. The Committee noted that the Agents had identified evidence of the downturn in the early s before it had become apparent in the official data.##NewPara##This latest evidence suggested that the slowdown was more marked than predicted in the Committee s August central projection, although measured GDP growth in Q was slightly stronger than expected. In judging how much weight to place on survey data, the Committee discussed##NewPara##possible causes and its consistency with recent data on demand and activity.##NewPara##One source of accumulating stress had been the substantial appreciation in the real exchange rate from mid-. This had not immediately hit confidence, in marked contrast to some earlier episodes when sterling had risen sharply, for example in the s and early s. And its impact on net trade had in fact taken much longer to emerge than the Bank had originally expected. There were various possible explanations for this, each of which probably had some validity. Some firms had initially had in place financial market hedges against currency movements, but anecdotal evidence suggested probably not much beyond a year. Similarly some firms would have enjoyed a degree of stability until contracts with overseas trading partners matured and were renegotiated. There might also have been a delayed effect where plans and major investment and expansion projects were reviewed at infrequent intervals. And, more generally, businesses had had to judge how persistent sterling s appreciation would be. As discussed at previous meetings and in earlier Inflation Reports, these and other factors might have contributed to long lags in the impact of sterling s appreciation on export volumes. As the effects became evident, the implications for the economy generally of a slowdown in the trade of externally exposed businesses might have become more apparent to firms in relatively more sheltered sectors and to consumers. For example, just as a buoyant services sector and strong domestic demand growth had probably helped to sustain growth in manufacturing for a while, so services would not be insulated from a manufacturing slowdown.##NewPara##In the absence of other factors, the slowdown brought about by sterling s appreciation and the tightening of monetary and fiscal policy could plausibly have been associated with a gradual decline in domestic sentiment rather than the sharp fall indicated by surveys. But the world economic outlook had been affected over the summer by a series of adverse shocks, which would further reduce external demand for UK exports and sharpen price competition from imports. Confidence in the financial services industry had been hit; optimism in the financial sector, as measured by the CBI Financial Services Survey, was lower in  Q than for eight years. Well publicised job cuts in a range of sectors, whether or not directly affected by general economic conditions, had probably increased awareness of the changing outlook.##NewPara##The preliminary official estimate suggested that Q GDP growth was unchanged at .%, still close to trend. But the latest industrial production numbers showed that output had recently been##NewPara##falling; in particular, manufacturing output fell by .% between July and September, with falls in most parts of the production industries. These numbers were more consistent with what recent surveys had been indicating, and gave grounds for thinking that the Q GDP number might be revised down. Separately there were signs in recent surveys - for example in the monthly CBI Industrial Trends Survey and the CBI Distributive Trades Survey - that recent output growth might have been associated with greater than planned stockbuilding, with production not yet fully adjusted to weakening demand.##NewPara##On the expenditure side, the Committee noted that the latest data showed falling retail sales growth, and lower turnover in the housing market compared with a year ago. Despite the recent sharp rebound, the equity market was % lower than its peak in July, which would tend to reduce consumption growth via its effect on households wealth, and reduce investment demand via a higher cost of capital.##NewPara##There were, therefore, signs in the data that a slowdown, as indicated by surveys, was occurring. The direction of change was clear. But it was quite possible that the surveys were painting too bleak a picture. For example, the equity market had not fallen to a level that would reduce consumption to the extent suggested by surveys. And the surveys had historically been more volatile than recorded output and so could mislead. Moreover, the tone of some public comment had moved from predicting a slowdown through a downturn, to a recession and even a slump. That was extreme, and might be contributing to deteriorating confidence. It could, therefore, have some effect on spending.##NewPara##In the light of all these considerations, the Committee judged that the forward-looking evidence from surveys and the Bank s regional Agents should be given increased weight in assessing the outlook for activity and inflation. The Committee thought that the economy should, however, be better placed to face adverse shocks than in the early s, in large part because both corporate and personal sector balance sheets (especially in the housing market) and liquidity were stronger now than then, and inflation had already reached the target. Moreover, monetary growth remained robust. The most likely outcome was for continuing positive output growth in , though at a lower rate than expected in August, and the downside risks had increased.##NewTopic##Implications of the world economic environment##NewPara##The international environment remained fragile. There was still considerable uncertainty about the prospects for recovery in the Japanese economy. The recession there was deeper than had been assumed in the Committee s August forecast. Most forecasters had revised down their projections for continental European growth. According to the initial estimate, Q growth in the United States had been stronger than expected, although some of that strength might be the result of involuntary inventory accumulation. US broad monetary growth remained quite strong. The risks of further contagion and shocks to emerging market economies seemed to have reduced somewhat over the past month, and the extreme uncertainty in some markets had lessened, perhaps helped most recently by the G statement.##NewPara##An important element of the Committee s analysis was the deteriorating outlook for world trade given the poor prospects in Japan and some emerging market economies. Between  and  world trade had grown at an average annual rate of %. This had risen to around % in -, but was projected by the international organisations to fall to -% over -. Part of the expected fall was attributable to (perhaps temporarily) reduced intra-Asian trade, which had accounted for much of the earlier increase. The Committee thought that the near term growth rate of the UK s export markets should fall by less than overall world trade. But on the other hand the strength of sterling, although less pronounced than in August, was likely to mean that UK exports would grow less quickly than UK export markets over the forecast period. The Committee agreed that it was most likely that net trade would contribute negatively to output growth over the next two years.##NewPara##The weakening in the external environment had also had a material effect on world prices. Commodity prices were still falling, as were input prices more generally. Looking forward, the expected rate of world price inflation had fallen compared with a quarter ago, reducing expected imported inflation and thus the outlook for RPIX. This was an important factor in the Committee s inflation projection. In addition, domestic output price inflation was at its lowest level since . Both CBI and BCC surveys indicated further falls.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##The Committee discussed a range of labour market indicators. LFS employment had risen quite strongly in the three months to August, as had total hours worked. On the other hand, LFS unemployment had increased slightly. The number of economically inactive people had fallen.##NewPara##Overall the latest quantity data suggested that conditions were still tight but might no longer be tightening.##NewPara##Earnings growth was a key indicator of domestically generated inflation. While labour market pressures should abate and earnings growth ease as the economy slowed, the implications for inflation would also depend on the current rate of earnings growth. There was greater than normal uncertainty about this, given the problems with the Average Earnings Index (AEI). The Committee agreed to reflect this in its forecast variance.##NewTopic##Monetary and credit conditions##NewPara##The future path of interest rates expected by the market was lower than a month ago, and much lower than at the time of the August Inflation Report. Taken together with the Committee s  basis point cut at its October meeting, this had delivered some easing in monetary conditions.##NewPara##Sterling had fallen  % from the -day average used in the projections published in the August Inflation Report. This would tend to reduce the restraining effect on inflation from sterling s earlier appreciation. The Committee judged that the balance of risks was still in the direction of sterling falling by more than assumed in its central projection, although the downside risk was not as large as in August.##NewPara##The Committee noted that broad money and credit growth remained robust. High broad money growth remained an upside risk to the inflation outlook. Unsecured lending to the personal sector continued to grow rapidly, although the macroeconomic consequences were possibly not great as it accounted for only around % of the stock of lending to the personal sector.##NewPara##Of more immediate interest was whether there were signs of a material tightening in credit conditions. The spread of corporate bond yields over government bond yields had increased significantly since the Russian and Long-Term Capital Management crises, corporate issuance was lower than usual, and actual and implied volatility were higher in a number of markets. But, perhaps in contrast to the United States, there was no evidence that the credit process had been significantly interrupted in the United Kingdom. Corporate bond and swap market spreads had eased slightly from the peaks, but were still high by previous standards. There had recently been some domestic corporate bond issuance in sterling, as well as a more marked return of issuance in international bond markets. Perhaps more significantly, UK banking markets seemed to have been less affected by the turbulence than capital markets. Conditions in wholesale money markets seemed reasonably calm.##NewPara##The syndicated credit markets had remained open; spreads had risen in this market too, but by rather less than in capital markets. The September M numbers did not suggest emergency drawing down of deposits, and showed continued robust growth in lending to the corporate sector. It was possible that that reflected reintermediation into the banking sector of some borrowing that would previously have been undertaken in the capital markets. This was widely believed to be occurring in the US, but dependence on capital market borrowing was much greater there. Evidence of this happening in the United Kingdom was less clear. The UK banking sector was, on the basis of currently available information, well capitalised by the standards of recent decades and so prospectively capable of reintermediating credit flows if that were to prove necessary.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that so far there was no evidence of a  credit crunch  in the sense of a material tightening of credit conditions for a given general level of interest rates and borrower credit risk. The environment had nevertheless changed somewhat. On the one hand, the general level of medium-longer maturity interest rates had fallen in recent months, so that the level of nominal yields (and probably real yields) on corporate bonds had fallen for at least the highest credit ratings, notwithstanding the widening of spreads. This would tend to be supportive of activity. On the other hand, as the economy slowed and as the shocks from the external environment affected the UK, the creditworthiness of some borrowers was deteriorating, which would affect the terms on which they could obtain credit. The corporate sector as a whole was, however, stronger financially than in the late s-early s, and thus should generally be better able to withstand a downturn.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that world financial markets were calmer than a few weeks earlier. But the possibility of a tightening of credit conditions in the future needed to be kept under careful review.##NewTopic##The MPC’s November forecast##NewPara##The Committee reviewed its forecast, which was described fully in the Inflation Report published in the week following the meeting.##NewPara##The general shape of the projections was as follows. Output growth was expected to fall for a year or so before recovering, principally via stronger domestic demand growth. In the second half of the forecast period and beyond, an important source of this increased demand was public sector consumption and investment, but there was some uncertainty about the timing of public investment spending. The balance of risks to activity were on the downside, largely on account of the external environment and risks to consumption. The central projection for inflation rose somewhat in the short run before falling. The balance of risks to the inflation outlook were modestly on the upside until##NewPara##mid- and then modestly on the downside, but overall closer to neutral throughout the forecast period than in August when the balance of risks had clearly been on the upside.##NewPara##There was a more important difference from the August forecast. For any given level of interest rates, the level of the projections for output growth and inflation were now both lower. If interest rates were left at .%, the central projection for inflation would undershoot the target at the end of the forecast period.##NewPara##The Committee discussed whether there were any major eventualities not captured in the forecast. It had increased the short-term uncertainty underlying the published projections to reflect the problems with the AEI numbers, but it was very difficult to judge the degree of extra uncertainty created. It was possible that further adverse news about the world economy could dent the outlook for output growth still further. And it was possible that weak world price inflation and the fall in domestic inflation expectations would have a bigger than assumed impact on RPIX. On the other hand, the recent recovery in the equity market meant that at the time of the meeting equity prices were % higher than the -day average used in the forecast. Overall the Committee felt that the important##NewPara##factors were reflected in the forecast.##NewPara##The Committee noted that the shape and level of the projections were different when made using market expectations of the likely path of interest rates (as derived from the short sterling futures contract adjusted for the typical premium between unsecured interbank deposit rates and gilt repo rates). Faster growth was implied, and a central projection for inflation which was above the target throughout  and . The Inflation Report would show the difference between projections based on constant interest rates and market rates (as at  November).##NewPara##The Committee discussed the predictions of a sample of outside forecasters. The average forecast of GDP in the year to Q  was down by one percentage point since August. Most forecasters predicted recovery in . Inflation profiles were generally lower than three months ago. The average of outside forecasts was similar to the Bank s central projection.##NewTopic##Tactical considerations##NewPara##While reiterating its earlier expressed view that there could be no mechanical or precise link between the forecast and policy settings, the Committee agreed that its latest forecast clearly pointed to a further cut in official interest rates. Before turning to the immediate policy decision, members first discussed a number of tactical considerations.##NewPara##Was there a case for delaying part of any desired rate cut on the grounds that some of the uncertainty about the earnings data should be resolved by the December or January meetings? The Committee agreed that this should not affect its immediate decision. It would need to take account of the new information about earnings as and when it became available, changing interest rates then if necessary.##NewPara##What would be the impact of different sized cuts on confidence and expectations in the real economy and financial markets? A range of views was expressed on this. One possible view was that, taken in isolation, a cut of more than  basis points might create the misleading impression that the outlook was worse than implied by the Committee s central projection on the grounds that##NewPara##financial markets thought the most likely outcome of the meeting was a cut of  basis points; and##NewPara##the Committee had so far moved (in both directions) in steps of  basis points. But, against this, any move would in fact be followed by publication of the Inflation Report a week later. Whatever the Committee s decision, policy would then be seen in the light of its forecast for inflation.##NewPara##A second possible view was that there would be positive merit in moving by more than  basis points in order to display that, as the Committee had said before, it was prepared to move in larger steps. The Committee agreed that while that might be a welcome by-product of a cut of more than##NewPara## basis points, it could not be part of the reason for such a cut, which had to depend on its assessment of the inflation outlook. A similarly welcome by-product, but again not one that could affect the decision, was that a larger than expected cut would underline the symmetry of the Committee s remit, ie that a prospect of falling below the  % target was taken as seriously as exceeding the target.##NewPara##A third possible view was that the Committee should err on the side of a larger cut in order to underpin business and consumer confidence in the economy. Against this it was felt that, whatever its size, the effect of a reduction in interest rates on confidence would depend on the justification for it.##NewPara##The Committee also needed to bear in mind that the larger the cut, the more likely it was that sterling would fall, which would tend to increase the price level and thus temporarily increase future expected inflation.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##By way of background, the Committee noted that over the past six years the economy had on average grown above trend, and until quite recently had still been growing at a rate that could not be sustained given the economy s productive capacity. That had been the justification for the past tightening of monetary policy. Relatively high short-term real rates of interest, fiscal policy tightening and the appreciation of the exchange rate had all helped to keep inflation in check, but it had still not fallen below   %, which was indicative of the strength of domestically generated inflationary pressures. Since August there had been a lot of news affecting the outlook for activity and inflation, including the fall in sterling, the shocks to the world economy, and the evidence from surveys and the Bank s regional Agents of a sharp fall in business and consumer confidence. The extent of the lags between these developments and their effect on growth and inflation was highly##NewPara##uncertain, but they implied lower activity growth and inflation than expected in August.##NewPara##Against this background, the Committee discussed the arguments for interest rate cuts of  basis points,  basis points, and of up to  basis points.##NewPara##Possible arguments identified for a  basis point cut were that the unusually high uncertainty about the earnings data pointed to caution in any move; that the Committee should avoid surprising financial markets given the risk of sterling falling if it did so; and that the Committee should avoid taking actions that could be construed as trying to fine tune output growth in . On the first of these points the Committee agreed that if the earnings data were substantially revised upwards the interest rate move might need to be reversed, but that was not per se an argument for moving in small steps now. On the second point, the Committee agreed that the risk of surprising the financial markets could not justify limiting the cut to a size that would leave the central projection for inflation materially below the target in the second year of the forecast. On the third point, the Committee agreed that monetary policy could not have a significant impact on output growth in  given the lags in its effects. But this did not amount to an argument for a  basis point cut.##NewPara##The arguments identified for a  basis point cut, supported in varying degrees by those members of the Committee who voted for this course of action, were as follows. First, on the central projection, with a  basis point cut inflation would rise slightly above the target before returning to around .% at the two year horizon, with the risks initially on the upside and later on the downside, and with uncertainty greater at the longer horizons. By contrast, if rates were cut by  basis points, inflation would be above the target throughout the year  on the central projection and up to the third quarter of  even if the balance of downside risks assumed in the forecast materialised. Second, a larger cut might cause sterling to fall by more than was taken into account in the forecast. Third, notwithstanding the opportunity to explain any policy decision in the following week s##NewPara##Inflation Report, there could well be a prolonged effect on perceptions of the Committee s assessment of the outlook, with a risk that people, businesses and markets mistakenly concluded that the Committee knew something that it had not disclosed about the outlook.##NewPara##Among those members favouring an immediate  basis point cut, there was a range of views on the likely future course of policy. On one view, it was more likely than not that further cuts would at##NewPara##some point be needed, but the lags in the economy meant that it was not optimal to make those cuts now. It was argued that further cuts could over time be necessary because at .% official rates would still most probably be above the  neutral  rate implied by an equilibrium real interest rate and the  % inflation target. It was also possible that the near-term downward pressures on UK domestic prices might be greater than reflected in the projection. On another view, the short run outlook for future policy was more evenly balanced, bearing in mind continued domestically generated inflationary pressures.##NewPara##The arguments identified for a cut of up to  basis points were as follows. First, given that the balance of risks to inflation was on the downside at the end of the forecast period, inflation could be expected to undershoot the target in about two years  time if rates were cut by only  basis points. The size of cut should take account of these risks. A cut of more than  basis points   possibly##NewPara## basis points, possibly in between   could be viewed as taking out insurance against those risks, with the precise size depending on the weight given to the downside risks and the value placed on insurance. Second, a larger cut might fortify otherwise fragile business and consumer confidence, helping to guard against the effects of encircling gloom and thus worse outcomes than featured in the Committee s forecast. Third, while a larger cut might well surprise the markets, it could be carefully explained in the Inflation Report, so that the cost of any surprise should be short-lived. Fourth, cutting by more than  basis points was preferable to cutting by  basis points with an expectation of making further cuts later.##NewPara##The Governor invited members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be cut by  basis points to .%. Eight members of the Committee (the Governor,##NewPara##Mervyn King, David Clementi, Alan Budd, Charles Goodhart, DeAnne Julius, Ian Plenderleith and John Vickers) voted for the proposition. Willem Buiter voted against, preferring a cut of  basis points.