The international environment: activity##NewPara##The Committee s interest rate reductions over the past few months had been heavily influenced by a weakening international environment. In preparing its February Inflation Report, it had assessed the cumulative news since its November projections.##NewPara##The strength of the US economy continued to surprise. The official estimate of GDP growth in  Q was significantly higher than the Committee had been expecting. The longer such strong growth persisted, the greater the risk that the economy would encounter capacity constraints and rising inflationary pressures, but so far US inflation had remained low. There was also a risk of a negative shock to demand. The strength in the US stock market, and therefore household wealth, was obviously contributing to buoyant consumption, encouraging low private sector savings out of income. The outlook was vulnerable to the possibility of a sharp equity market correction. It was also possible that the increasing trade deficit associated with such strong demand growth would intensify trade policy tensions, although it had to be recognised that the US economy was operating at or above capacity overall. Any possible trade tensions might be ameliorated by the recent appreciation of the yen, although that potentially exacerbated the weakness of aggregate demand in Japan. While continuing robust US demand growth was possible in the short run and was helping to sustain global activity, the balance of risks in the medium term was on the downside.##NewPara##The prospects for the global economy would be better if there were a more positive outlook for demand growth in the euro area. While consumer confidence indicators were quite strong, measures of industrial sentiment were weak. It was not clear whether this reflected recent weakness in activity growth, or whether it was a leading indicator of further output weakness. Possible explanations for the fall in business confidence in continental Europe##NewPara##included the cumulative effects of the emerging market economy crises on export markets and import competition; and uncertainty about economic policies. There seemed to be divergent views in the euro area on the importance of supply-side policies, including structural reform of labour markets; and on the desirable mix of fiscal and monetary policy. A related area of uncertainty was the prospective policy response of the European Central Bank (ECB) if the outlook for demand remained sluggish. Some commentators had speculated that as long as inflation (as measured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices) was in the range %-%, the ECB s definition of price stability, ECB interest rate policy would be in a  zone of inaction ; ie that the ECB might not respond to expected changes in inflation so long as it was set to remain in that range. Uncertainty about ECB policy at this early point was probably inevitable. It was also noted that the outlook in some of the smaller EMU countries was more buoyant than in Germany, France and Italy; and that the ECB s figures for the three-month centred average of the annual rate of growth of euro area broad money remained slightly above its .% reference rate.##NewPara##Japan remained a concern, with the recession likely to last longer than thought earlier and with the balance of risks in the short run on the downside. There were some positive signs that policymakers would tackle the structural problems in the financial sector. If embarked upon with determination, this would not only be beneficial in itself but might also give a positive signal about policy more generally, and so help to restore confidence. In addition, a consequence of the long recession was that corporate balance sheets were also generally weak, so that financial sector reform - while necessary and important - might well not be sufficient to restore growth.##NewPara##In the emerging market economies, the main event since the Committee s January meeting had been the floating of the Brazilian real, and the questions which that had raised about Brazil s monetary policy and about fiscal sustainability given the structure of its domestic and external debt. So far direct spillover effects seemed to have been small, perhaps because the float had been discounted by markets. The spread of the yield on emerging market US $ bonds over US Treasury Bond yields had, however, risen back towards the highs seen shortly after Russia s default in mid-. The situation remained fragile.##NewPara##Taking these developments together, the Committee agreed that the recent news about the international environment underlined its concerns about the world economic outlook, rather than substantially shifted its view compared with a month ago. In particular, the Committee##NewPara##remained concerned about the current and prospective imbalances in the global economy. Given reduced net capital flows to many emerging market economies, the industrialised world probably needed to stimulate domestic demand, to help offset weaker net trade, if world demand growth was to be sustained. So far, with domestic demand very weak in Japan and sluggish in the euro area, the United States had effectively been acting as  consumer of last resort . But it was uncertain how long that could last, given the already prolonged period of above-trend growth in the United States. While the balance of risks to activity in Japan was on the downside in the short run but possibly on the upside in the medium run, it was probably the other way round in the United States. The industrialised world therefore faced a formidable challenge in balancing current and prospective aggregate world demand with potential supply. It would be difficult to manage the scale and timing of any adjustments to domestic demand; and industrial countries would need to accept larger current account deficits (or smaller surpluses) while domestic demand was stimulated. The process might in principle be helped by exchange-rate adjustments amongst the major floating currencies, but this was highly uncertain in practice.##NewTopic##The international environment: prices##NewPara##Against this background, the Committee debated the proposition that the world economy could conceivably be on a path to generalised price deflation. The prices of a range of internationally traded goods and services had been falling. Evidence from further along the price chain could be seen in UK manufacturing input and output prices: following a fall of nearly % in the twelve months to December, input prices were down to the level prevailing in , and output price growth (which reflected labour costs as well as input prices) had been flat for the first time since . The risk of domestic inflation expectations falling sharply could, on this view, be exacerbated by the coincidence of weak world prices with the prospect of the RPI falling to historically low levels on account of the recent reductions in mortgage interest rates.##NewPara##A number of arguments were made against the prospect of global price deflation. First, the prices of some higher-value-added internationally traded goods and services were still rising. Second, the path of sterling input prices over the past couple of years had been affected by sterling s large appreciation from August . Third, many G central banks were pursuing de facto inflation targets (i.e. annual increases in average prices) of around %; for example, the UK s target was  /% and the ECB defined price stability as %-%. Achieving sustained low inflation was consistent with - indeed probably required - falls in the##NewPara##nominal price of some goods and services while those of others rose, reflecting for example different rates of productivity growth in different sectors, and/or shifting patterns of relative demand. Not all firms could rely on rises in the nominal price of their products and some might have to accept that their prices would normally be falling; but, given the UK s poor inflationary record over the past  years or so, it might take time for this to be reflected in firms  behaviour. Fourth, money growth in the United States and in Europe remained reasonably strong. In the medium to long run central banks should be able to determine the average rate of inflation, and the average rate of money growth was a reasonable broad indicator of the trend rate of increase of nominal variables.##NewPara##Overall, the Committee agreed that in the short term there were downside risks to UK domestic prices from weaker than expected world prices. Judgments on the extent of this risk varied.##NewTopic##Monetary conditions##NewPara##Sterling s effective exchange rate had not changed much over the past month. The Committee noted that its recent interest rate reductions had not been accompanied by a fall in sterling.##NewPara##Inflation expectations, as measured by surveys, had fallen further over the past month. It was suggested that they might now be better anchored around the  /% target.##NewPara##The recent trend in the broad money numbers had been more comforting than during much of . Annual growth in December was .%, and the three and six-month growth rates slightly lower. M lending growth had also eased back. Much of the recent fall had been accounted for by the Other Financial Companies sector, and it was too early to tell whether this simply reflected a larger-than-usual seasonal shrinking of balance sheets around the year-end. Household broad money growth, at around  /%, was higher in December than during most of .##NewPara##Unsecured consumer credit taken out by the household sector had continued to grow strongly. However, it appeared possible that over the past few years this had mirrored lower borrowing via mortgage equity withdrawal, which had been negative since the early s. Work by Bank staff suggested that there had not been a marked change in the relationship##NewPara##between consumption and total borrowing for consumption (as measured by unsecured borrowing plus mortgage equity withdrawal).##NewPara##Overall, the Committee judged that, since its November projections were finalised, the upside risks to inflation from cumulatively strong money growth had eased; and that there was a smaller risk of sterling depreciating by more than implied by interest rate differentials.##NewTopic##Domestic demand: household balance sheets and consumption##NewPara##The Committee noted that the preliminary estimate of .% GDP growth in  Q was consistent with the degree of slowdown expected in its November central projection. Some members had feared lower growth, and the possibility of revisions remained. Surveys suggested that consumer and business sentiment had stopped deteriorating and had perhaps improved slightly, possibly helped by the  basis point reduction in official interest rates since October. The preliminary data on Q expenditure suggested, however, that household spending might have grown by less in relation to income and wealth than the Committee had assumed in November.##NewPara##In this context, the Committee discussed the household sector balance sheet. The ratio of debt-to-net worth was lower than in recent cycles, but this was in part attributable to high equity prices, and so was potentially vulnerable to a fall in the stock market, which among other things might be triggered by a fall in the US market. The ratio of debt service charges-to- household income was also low by recent standards, although this largely reflected low nominal interest rates. On the other hand, the debt-to-income ratio was quite high. Overall the Committee did not regard this as a material concern: the personal sector had increased its debt following the financial liberalisations of the s, so that earlier periods were not a good guide. On this view, the state of household balance sheets was unlikely to provide an explanation for the weaker-than-expected consumption.##NewPara##The Committee noted that some savers had been adversely affected by the fall in interest rates. Some commentators had argued that this would reduce aggregate demand. A number of observations were made about this. The fall in medium-long run nominal interest rates - for example conventional gilt yields - largely reflected quite a large fall in expected inflation. The earlier higher nominal yields had been compensating for the erosion, via inflation, of the real value of their wealth, so that households may in the past have been consuming part of the real##NewPara##capital value of their investment. They could continue to do so in a low inflation environment, but this would mean realising part of their investment rather than spending from high nominal income receipts. It was possible that not all savers understood this, in which case lower nominal rates on savings products might have had a small dampening affect on consumption. But it was unclear why this inflation illusion should influence savers more than borrowers.##NewPara##Against this background and its earlier discussions on this broad issue (reported in the minutes of its December meeting), the Committee noted that it had decided, in preparing its latest projections, to make some allowance for the possibility that consumption growth over the forecast period might not offset the weaker-than-expected outturns of the past few quarters.##NewTopic##Conditions in labour and product markets##NewPara##The outlook for conditions in the labour market was very uncertain. In particular, the recent rate of earnings growth was unusually uncertain, given the continued absence of the Average Earnings Index; and it was unclear why measured productivity growth had recently been below trend.##NewPara##As regards earnings growth, the Committee considered the outlook for pay settlements and for wage drift (the difference between earnings growth and settlements). Settlements had been fairly stable since the middle of ; and an informal survey undertaken by the Bank s regional Agents had recorded that more firms expected settlements in  to be below the  level than expected them to be above: Wage drift also seemed likely to moderate. Average hours worked had in fact already fallen, so there had probably been a fall in overtime payments. The Reward Index was suggesting that earnings growth had been slowing. The Working Time Directive and the National Minimum Wage were, by contrast, likely to put upward pressure on labour costs. The Committee noted that lower growth in nominal earnings than previously expected would be consistent with the fall in survey-based measures of inflation expectations. The Committee also received an oral progress report on the independent review, commissioned by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, of the official Average Earnings Index. No figures were yet available for the Committee, but the indications were that the##NewPara##review would not be inconsistent at least with the starting point for the path of nominal earnings growth assumed by the Committee.##NewPara##Some members of the Committee were concerned about the potential knock-on effects from the recently announced settlements for public sector workers. Other members thought that, with a reasonably integrated labour market, the public sector could be expected to settle close to the economy-wide average over time.##NewPara##The Committee agreed to incorporate a materially lower profile for nominal earnings growth in its February projection compared with November, although its central projection was still above the average of outside forecasts.##NewPara##There was considerable uncertainty about recent and prospective growth in productivity, and so in unit labour costs. Employment having risen strongly over the past few years, productivity growth had, at around  /% annually, been significantly below trend. The various possible explanations had quite different implications for the outlook for inflation. One possibility was simply mismeasurement. A second was that firms thought the slowdown in activity growth would not last long so that, given the costs of adjusting the size of their labour forces, they were content to employ more people than needed for current activity levels; ie they were hoarding labour. That would mean current levels of employment exaggerated the degree of capacity utilisation at present. Correcting for this would imply lower margins and inflationary pressures.##NewPara##A third possibility was that as unemployment had fallen so had productivity growth, through people entering the workforce into lower productivity jobs, with lower pay, following the various structural reforms to the labour market. In that case, productivity would be expected to grow in the future at its past trend rate but starting from a lower average level. Productive capacity, at any particular level of employment, would in that case be lower than implied by previous relationships. This would have less benign implications for inflation than the labour hoarding explanation.##NewPara##The Committee agreed to give some weight to each of these possible explanations in its central projection. However, some members did not attach weight to the third possible explanation, pointing to recent robust growth in labour productivity in the United States despite very low unemployment there; excluding it would reduce the central projection for inflation by around . percentage points.##NewTopic##The MPC’s February projections##NewPara##The Committee reviewed its projections, which were described more fully in the##NewPara##Output growth was expected to fall during  but to recover during , partly reflecting planned increases in public sector spending. As in November, the balance of risks to activity was on the downside over the whole of the forecast period. The shape of the central projection for inflation was broadly flat over most of the forecast period, rising slightly towards the two year horizon. The balance of risks to inflation was slightly on the upside until the middle of the year  and then slightly on the downside. Uncertainty about the projections (ie the variance) had been adjusted to reflect the continuing suspension of the Average Earnings Index.##NewPara##For any given level of interest rates, the level of the projections for both output growth and inflation was lower than in November. The main changes to the output projection were lower consumption and the weaker outlook for world demand and UK exports. The inflation projection was also affected by the lower path assumed for nominal earnings growth. If interest rates were left at %, both the central projection for inflation and the average projection (taking account of the balance of risks) - ie both the mode and the mean - were materially below the  /% inflation target. The projections therefore pointed towards a further reduction in interest rates.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the predictions of a sample of outside forecasters. The median forecast for inflation was around  /% in  Q. It was possible that this simply reflected a belief that the Committee would pursue a policy that would succeed in achieving the  /% target at that horizon. The assumptions of outside forecasters about interest rates were also likely to differ from the constant rate assumption used in the Bank s own projections.##NewPara##The Committee noted that the level of short term interest rates implied by financial markets fell to around % by the end of . Using market interest rates in the Bank s projections implied that both the central projection for inflation and the average projection (taking account of the risks) would be above the  /% target from the middle of , and materially so by the end of the two year forecast horizon.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee discussed whether its latest projections for GDP growth and inflation had implications for the timing of any policy changes. In particular, should any further reductions in interest rates be made quickly given that the most significant weakness in activity was expected over the next six months? Would cuts now endanger the inflation outlook over the medium run given that towards the end of the forecast period output growth was expected to reach trend and inflation to be rising?  The Committee agreed that various time paths for interest rates would be consistent with achieving the inflation target. Its central projection was for the annual rate of output growth to be below trend for the next six quarters, so that an immediate easing of policy could stimulate activity and reduce downward pressures on inflation in the short run without causing an overshoot of the target over the medium run. Policy might then have to be tightened at some point in the coming two years if output growth recovered as expected, but that could not yet be judged, and it did not need to be.##NewPara##Against that background, there was agreement that interest rates needed to be reduced again. A  basis point reduction, taking the Bank s repo rate to .% would leave the central projection below target throughout the second year of the forecast period. A  basis point reduction, to .%, would bring the central projection broadly into line with the target throughout the forecast period. At the two year horizon, the central projection would be just a little above the target; the average projection (taking account of the balance of risks) would still be slightly below target. It was noted that some of the risks reflected in the forecast were of a kind to which the Committee could respond if and when they materialised. Setting aside risks of this kind, the average rate of inflation at the end of forecast horizon with constant .% official interest rates was also close to the target. These considerations pointed towards a  basis point reduction.##NewPara##A second argument made in favour of  basis points was that it would provide a degree of insurance against some of the downside risks. In particular, the international outlook looked slightly more fragile than a month ago, and there was a risk of labour market pressures proving materially weaker than assumed in the Committee s projections.##NewPara##A third argument for  basis points was that any consequential fall in sterling would be helpful in alleviating the continuing imbalances in the economy, without endangering##NewPara##achievement of the inflation target.##NewPara##One view was that at this point of the economic cycle interest rates should be close to, or possibly below, their  neutral  level; ie, providing neither stimulus nor constraint to the economy. While that level could not be stimulated with great accuracy, a reduction of  basis points, on this view, would take the nominal short term rate into its probable neutral range. Three reasons were given why, on this view, a reduction of more than  basis points might be needed. First, it might already be too late to stop RPIX inflation falling materially below target over the next year. In that case, a larger cut would help to anchor inflation expectations closer to the target over the medium run. Second, it was plausible, judging from the reports of the Bank s regional Agents and from surveys, that earnings growth would be lower in  than in , contrary to the assumption used in the Committee s central projection. Third, the Committee s inflation projection did not place enough weight on the possibility of world price inflation being weaker than assumed. However, evidence on each of these uncertainties would materialise over the next few months, and a larger than  basis point reduction now might unsettle financial markets. On this view, therefore, a cut of  basis points was the right step for now.##NewPara##On another view, there were arguments for a reduction of - basis points. First, the central projection for inflation was around . percentage points too high because the level of productivity would be higher than assumed for the reasons explained in paragraph . The average (ie mean) projection for inflation, should also be lower both for that reason and also because of the possibility of weaker world prices. Second, given that monetary policy was expected generally to affect activity growth with a shorter lag than it affected inflation, it would be possible to ease policy by more than  basis points now with a view to supporting activity in the relatively near term without endangering achievement of the inflation target. On this view, these two factors together made a reduction in the range  -  basis points desirable.##NewPara##The Governor invited members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be cut by .% to .%. Eight members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, David Clementi, Alan Budd, Charles Goodhart, DeAnne Julius, Ian Plenderleith and John Vickers) voted for the proposition. Willem Buiter voted against, preferring a cut of .%.