The world economy##NewPara##The latest US indicators suggested some further improvement relative to expectations a few months ago. After falling by . percentage points in  Q, output was estimated to have grown very slightly in Q. Consumption had been stronger than expected, largely reflecting spending on cars encouraged by heavy price discounting. A substantial part of this demand had, however, been met by running down inventories, reducing its net contribution to output growth. Investment in information and communication technology had in Q risen for the first time in over a year. While employment had fallen in December, the rate of unemployment had also dropped, implying that some people had moved out of the workforce. Looking forward, most of the recent US survey evidence was positive. Measures of consumer confidence had continued to rise, and were now well above post- September troughs. The Institute for Supply Management s manufacturing purchasing managers  index had risen again, to .. The non-manufacturing index had fallen only slightly on the month   from . to .##NewPara##  but by rather more when compared with the original estimate for December of .. It was still, though, considerably higher than immediately after  September.##NewPara##In the euro area   probably the most important region for assessing the impact of global conditions on the UK economy   there was a disjunction between the backward-looking data and more forward-looking surveys. Demand and output growth had remained weak   somewhat more so than had been built into the Committee s November projections. But business confidence measures were stronger, and purchasing manager indices had risen for the third consecutive month for both manufacturing and services. Consumer confidence indices had been broadly flat on the month. Compared with the November Inflation Report assumptions, however, the immediate outlook for euro- area activity was somewhat weaker. There was also a downside risk to domestic demand, but compared with the United States the euro area was not particularly exposed to risks stemming from##NewPara##imbalances. It was conceivable that the current debate about the Stability and Growth Pact would cause fiscal policy to be tightened relative to current plans, but that seemed unlikely.##NewPara##Conditions continued to be difficult in Japan. Industrial production had fallen sharply over the past year. Deflation persisted. Looking forward, there were downside risks associated with the problems in the financial sector and uncertainty about their resolution. The significance of this for the overall world economic outlook was, however, unclear as Japan s difficulties seemed not to have had a big impact on global conditions over recent years; for example, world trade growth had been very strong in .##NewPara##Against this background, the Committee discussed the risks to the US economic outlook since that was the source of greatest uncertainty affecting global prospects. The underlying position in the United States might be less strong than would perhaps appear from a near-term recovery in growth associated with firms completing their inventory corrections and a rebound from the dip in demand immediately after  September.  What would matter more in the period ahead was the strength of final domestic demand. While business surveys suggested that investment would not continue falling, they did not yet point to a sustained pick up. There might still be an investment overhang, in which case company spending would be weaker than otherwise. Perhaps more significantly, there were downside risks to consumption from the build up of household debt. Even at low official interest rates, the debt servicing burden was historically high relative to income. If saving were to rise sharply, there might also be a fall in the dollar s exchange rate, which would in turn tend to reduce the real spending power of household incomes. Separately, the Enron case seemed to be affecting the equity market s valuation of other companies. Increased uncertainty about the integrity of published earnings might perhaps be causing a rise in the risk premium; and looking forward, more conservative accounting practices might reduce future growth in published earnings. However, the impact seemed so far to be localised rather than across company share prices generally; and the effect on wealth and demand would plausibly be smaller than would be the case if, say, the expected rate of return on capital generally were revised down.##NewPara##To the extent that weight was given to these possible downside risks, an important question was how well monetary authorities would be able to respond if any of them crystallised. On the one hand, while US headline inflation had fallen, reflecting lower oil prices, measures of  core  inflation (which stripped out food and energy prices) had gradually edged up from around % to nearly % over the past two years, perhaps prospectively reducing the scope for further policy easing. On the other hand,##NewPara##it was suggested that it was not unusual, given the lags in the economy, for core inflation to continue rising during a slowdown in output growth and then to fall back as the economy recovered, so that there was little reason to think that interest rates could not be cut further if the recovery stalled.##NewPara##Overall, the Committee concluded that the international news on the month was positive. The outlook was for world economic growth to recover during this year, but with somewhat weaker activity in the near term than had been built into its November Inflation Report projections. The balance of risks was modestly on the downside.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##The global conjuncture implied considerable uncertainty about the sustainability of the current constellation of exchange rates. The US dollar had strengthened again over the past month and, on an effective rate basis, was at a -year high. But the internal and external imbalances in the US economy, associated with the build up of debt, posed downside risks. It was difficult to envisage recovery in the Japanese economy without some further yen weakness. The euro had weakened again, and might be restrained by the subdued outlook for euro-area growth and by public commentary on possible tensions between monetary and fiscal policy. But obviously not all of these major currencies could fall at the same time.##NewPara##Compared with the three main currency blocs, sterling s exchange rate was relatively more important for domestic monetary policy given that the United Kingdom was a smaller, more open economy. In effective terms, sterling was broadly unchanged over the month, having fallen against the US dollar and risen against the euro. On balance the Committee judged that the risks to sterling were weighted on the downside, although some members found that difficult to square with the possibility of a more general realignment of bilateral exchange rates given the international conjuncture.##NewPara##Recent UK monetary, credit and housing market data had been robust. The annual rate of broad money (M) growth had slowed slightly, to just under %, in December. But the household measures were generally strong. Notes and coin had risen by % on an annualised basis in the latest three months. Household Divisia money   a broader measure of transactions balances   had grown by over % in the year to end-December. Total household borrowing growth remained very strong: around % in the year to December. Secured borrowing growth had been over %. House prices were up nearly % on a year ago on the Nationwide measure; and over  % on the Halifax measure, which##NewPara##had risen by .% in January. According to the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, the balance of estate agents across the country expecting house prices to rise had increased from + in December to + in January.##NewPara##The Committee discussed some of the possible implications of a substantial cumulative rise in household debt relative to income and of the position of household finances more generally. Capital gearing had also risen, but was still below the levels prevailing through much of the s. Income gearing was low at current interest rates by historical standards; other things being equal, interest rates would have to rise substantially for income gearing to reach early-s levels.##NewPara##It was not clear, however, whether the early s provided a sensible benchmark of sustainability. On the one hand, in an environment of greater macroeconomic stability, households might be able to sustain higher levels of debt relative to income than in the past. They might simply be making that adjustment; the debt-to-income ratio in the United Kingdom was not out of line with that in many other developed economies. Official interest rates had risen by seven percentage points, from % to %, over a short period in the late-s/early-s. A similar absolute rise was now unlikely.  Affordability  measures of housing   for example, the interest cost of servicing a mortgage relative to income   were, it was suggested, reassuring. Nor was the level of household saving directly comparable with past episodes;  it was stronger than implied by the headline numbers.  Measures of the household saving ratio which adjusted for inflation were not markedly below the long-term average; and adjusting for spending on durables   on the grounds that they yield a flow of services over time   would, other things being equal, increase the ratio. Furthermore, it was not clear that policy would need to be tightened sharply to restrain demand if rapid borrowing growth continued. Other things being equal, higher debt   as well as the abolition of mortgage interest tax relief   might mean that, compared with the past, smaller changes in official interest rates would be required for a given desired effect on spending and saving decisions.##NewPara##On the other hand, the high levels of debt in the late s had made households vulnerable, compounding the subsequent downturn. Was it clear that borrowers and lenders remembered the lessons of that episode? The more stable monetary environment did not point unambiguously in the direction of more debt being safe. The unexpected rise in inflation in the late s had eroded the real burden of household debt; that was also now less likely. In addition, the lower nominal interest rates implied by lower medium-term inflation expectations meant that the real burden of servicing and repaying debt was now spread more evenly over the life of a loan than during the higher-inflation late-##NewPara##s, when it had been concentrated in the early years of a loan. Related to that, measures of income gearing based only on interest payments might, by ignoring principal repayments, underestimate the household sector s overall debt burden, although some members thought that the quantitative significance of this adjustment for most housing-related loans was likely to be small. Finally, it was possible that the effect on household behaviour of any increase in interest rates would also depend on the proportional change rather than just on the absolute change.##NewPara##Persistently rising debt levels potentially increased the probability that any adjustment to household balance sheets would be abrupt rather than smooth, with an attendant risk of a fall in asset prices and, thus, in the value of collateral. In those circumstances, there might also be implications for financial sector behaviour and associated constraints on household credit availability, which could feed back into spending and so somewhat amplify the effect on aggregate demand. In the view of some members, therefore, rising debt levels risked increasing the volatility of output and so of inflation in the medium term, potentially making future inflation outturns more uncertain. Other members placed little or no weight on this.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The imbalances in the economy had for some time been reflected in quite different outturns for manufacturing and services sector output, and for consumption and investment. Manufacturing output had fallen by .% in Q, and was .% below the level of a year earlier. Services output had, by contrast, risen by .%, and was up .% on twelve months before. The gap between the annual growth rates had not been as big since .##NewPara##Retail sales had risen by .% in Q and by .% on  Q. The implications of the data for December itself were, however, unclear. On an unadjusted basis, sales had grown by .% in December. But the seasonal adjustment factor was a massive -.%. On a seasonally adjusted basis, retail spending had, therefore, fallen by .%. Since there was unavoidable uncertainty about the precise size of so large a seasonal adjustment, it would be premature to give much weight to this month s data.##NewPara##Consumption growth, while remaining strong, seemed likely, on the basis of available information, to have eased back in Q: from an average quarterly rate of around % in the first three quarters of  to, perhaps, around  %. This seemed to reflect weaker spending on services, which##NewPara##might in part reflect temporary  September effects. Looking ahead, it was possible that durables spending would slow. As a share of total consumption, it had reached historical highs during , but had typically declined relatively quickly during previous economic slowdowns. Given the recovery in consumer confidence, the buoyancy of the housing market and the robust household money and credit numbers, there was not yet conclusive evidence that consumption growth would continue to slow in the near term. The Committee still expected it to slow further ahead, reflecting earlier falls in wealth and the prospect of weaker real income growth.##NewPara##The outlook for investment would be affected by corporate profitability, amongst other factors. Manufacturing profitability (as measured by the annual post-tax rate of return on capital) had been only around  % in Q, the latest period for which there were data: the lowest rate since early . Services sector profitability remained much higher, but had now declined from a peak of around % in  to about  % in  Q.##NewPara##According to the British Chambers of Commerce s Q survey, investment intentions in both manufacturing and services were weak. But more generally, recent business surveys had been more encouraging. For example, the Chartered Institute of Purchasing Supply services business activity index had risen; and for manufacturing, the CBI Quarterly Industrial Trends survey was slightly stronger than three months ago. More optimism in the corporate sector might improve investment prospects in due course.##NewPara##Overall, the Committee expected investment gradually to recover in line with aggregate demand and output.  But the immediate outlook was weak.   In the view of some members, while in the short run the balance of risks to consumption was on the upside, it was on the downside for investment. Further ahead, the balance of risks to aggregate private sector spending was on the downside.##NewTopic##Labour market conditions##NewPara##Although employment, on the Labour Force Survey measure, had increased by .% in the three months to November, hours worked had fallen by .%, largely due to less overtime work. Unemployment had risen slightly. It seemed, therefore, that firms were still hiring workers, coping with shifts in demand by adjusting hours worked. The implications of this looking forward were uncertain. On the one hand, if output growth remained reasonably robust, overtime and hours worked might rise again, without further increases in employment; alternatively, firms might hire more##NewPara##workers, unwinding the recent rise in unemployment and leading to a re-tightening of labour market conditions. In that case, consumption might not soften as much as expected. If, on the other hand, hours worked recovered to earlier levels but growth stalled, unemployment might rise quite sharply. The path of earnings growth could differ considerably between these scenarios.##NewPara##Earnings growth had eased back slightly in the three months to November compared with the previous three months. Regular pay growth had also slowed; on a non-seasonally-adjusted basis, the twelve month rate had fallen back from .% to .%. Given that overtime pay rates were typically higher than pay for normal hours, the fall might be explained by lower overtime. Bonuses remained significantly lower than last year. Together with uncertainty about the timing of bonuses at some firms over the next few months, this could make the earnings data difficult to interpret.##NewPara##The survey data on employment intentions suggested that demand for labour had recently fallen in services as well as manufacturing. Intelligence from the Bank s regional Agents was consistent with this, and also suggested that on balance their contacts expected pay settlements and, to a lesser extent, earnings growth to be lower in  than in .##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##At a little over $ per barrel, oil prices had been fairly stable over the month and, indeed, since the Committee s November Inflation Report. While some other commodity prices had risen, world price pressures remained weak. It was noted that consumer prices had been falling in each of China, Japan, Singapore and Hong Kong, which together accounted for approaching one fifth of world GDP weighted at purchasing power parity exchange rates.##NewPara##During its meeting, the Committee received the ONS s preliminary estimate of January RPIX inflation. At .%, this was much higher than expected. It would represent a sharp rise from .% in December, and was well above the increase which could be accounted for by the unwinding of low petrol prices a year ago. Some of the unexpected increase reflected seasonal food prices, but on a first reading some of the other contributory factors were not so obviously erratic. The Committee agreed that a full analysis of the data would be needed before its March meeting. The data underlined the volatility of annual RPIX inflation from month to month. The short-term risks to RPIX inflation appeared to lie on the upside in Q and on the downside in Q.##NewTopic##The February GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections to be published in the##NewPara##On the assumption of an unchanged official repo rate of % over the next two years, the central projection was for the annual rate of GDP growth to ease back slightly during the first half of , before recovering to around trend. The central projection for inflation was below target over the next year or so, after which it rose back towards the  % target by the two-year horizon, when it was still slightly below the target but rising. In the Inflation Report fan charts, the balance of risks to growth was on the downside, reflecting the risks to the world economic outlook and to private sector domestic demand. The risks to inflation were weighted slightly to the upside, largely due to the effect on import prices of a possible sterling depreciation.##NewPara##Some members preferred different assumptions for both the central projections and risks. Some thought that the most likely outlook for inflation was a little higher. Others thought that it could be up to a quarter of a percentage point lower   a smaller difference than in recent quarters   reflecting views that there would be a greater-than-assumed disinflationary effect from weak world price inflation and that the economy s supply potential was higher than assumed; this was shown in Table .B of the Inflation Report. On risks, some members placed greater weight on upside risks to both output and inflation. Others judged that the overall balance of risks around the central projection was weighted to the downside for both output and inflation, and in particular did not place much weight on the possibility of a sterling depreciation or on its estimated effect on inflation.##NewTopic##Possible tactical considerations##NewPara##The Committee noted that there was a firm expectation, in financial markets and amongst commentators, that the repo rate would be unchanged this month.##NewPara##The Committee noted that some commentators had advocated intervention in the foreign exchange markets in an attempt to moderate the strength of sterling s exchange rate. The Committee was clearly of the view that intervention was not likely, on its own, to be effective in the present circumstances.##NewPara##The Committee reviewed a range of possible general considerations bearing on the relationship between its fan chart projections and its policy decisions. First, it was important to place weight not just on the central (modal) projection but also on the risks, and   just as important   on the economic factors and analysis behind the fan charts. Second, the fan charts sometimes reflected some low probability, high impact events, which there was no need for policy to anticipate because the   Committee could respond to them if and when they crystallised. Third, there were some eventualities (for example, an oil price rise) for which, if they occurred, the appropriate course might be for the Committee to accommodate the first round effects on the price level (and so measured inflation), depending on the economic circumstances prevailing. Fourth, the weight placed on the projection of inflation at the two-year horizon should reflect the nature of the economic influences underlying that projection and whether, in consequence, inflation was projected to be stable, rising or falling then. Fifth, the Committee might sometimes give weight to the expected variability of output and inflation; for example, to whether there were factors which might affect the risks of missing the inflation target, in either direction, by a material amount in the medium term. How much weight should properly be given to these different considerations would vary with the circumstances. The constant factor was the need, under the Government s remit, to set policy in order to achieve the inflation target. The Committee s projections were, therefore, a vital input to its decisions since they were forward looking.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Various arguments   given different weights by different members   were identified for leaving the repo rate unchanged. First, with the central projection for inflation at the two year horizon only slightly below the  % target and rising, for some members the Committee s projections were in principle consistent with leaving the repo rate unchanged, cutting it slightly or even with raising it slightly. As things currently stood, the outlook was sufficiently close to target that the forecast did not help inform the choice between marginally different policy settings, as a range of interest rate paths could be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term. But in the current conjuncture, cutting rates would undesirably stimulate an already buoyant household sector; and with price pressures currently so benign, a rate increase would be premature. The best course was to leave rates unchanged. Second, some members emphasised the prospect that inflation would be rising at the two year horizon. There would be a risk to the effectiveness of policy if the Committee were to cut rates now only to have to increase them quite shortly afterwards even in the absence of news. It was preferable for the Committee to build and maintain a reputation for making policy settings which##NewPara##would persist unless economic circumstances changed. That way, repo rate changes would tend to have a bigger impact on longer-term interest rates, the exchange rate and other asset prices, aiding the effectiveness of policy. Third, some members placed weight on upside risks to the inflation outlook. Two main risks to inflation were emphasised: from the possibility of a depreciation of sterling s exchange rate and from the possibility that consumption would not slow as much as projected. These risks were connected, given the imbalances in the economy.  There was evidence that the exchange rate was overvalued. The skew to the exchange rate built into the published fan charts was reasonable: it was, for example, fairly close to the profile which would be implied by uncovered-interest-rate parity, which was a conditioning assumption in some outside forecasts. Other members placed less weight on the exchange rate risk in the published fan charts   either because they thought the probability of a depreciation was low or because the pass through to prices would be small or because policy could react if and when sterling fell. But they shared a concern about over-stimulating household spending. A fourth reason identified for maintaining the Bank s repo rate at % arose, therefore, from the possibility, suggested by recent outturns, that consumption growth now responded more strongly and more quickly to interest rate changes than in the past. Since consumption growth was not expected to moderate until the second half of the year, cutting interest rates now would  stimulate household spending too much in the short run. A preferable course would be to leave rates unchanged for now, cutting them if necessary later in the year as and when domestic demand growth slowed and when the path of the international economy was clearer. Fifth, some members placed weight on risks to the future variance of inflation from high and rising levels of household debt.  A cut  in rates would encourage further borrowing, increasing the risk of a subsequent abrupt downward adjustment in household spending   and perhaps in asset prices   at some point, which in turn would increase the volatility of inflation around the target. Finally, the news that the January RPIX inflation outturn was expected to be .% raised the possibility that inflationary pressures might not, in fact, be as benign as had been thought. The data would need to be analysed carefully in order to form a judgment on how erratic they were.##NewPara##Various arguments   again given different weights by different members   were also identified for cutting the repo rate. First, the central projection for inflation was below the  % target throughout the two-year forecast period. That created a prima facie case for a rate cut, especially given the need for symmetry in policy reactions. Second, it was possible that the US economy might not recover steadily this year given the possibility of a continuing investment overhang, of households and firms repairing balance sheets stretched by the build up of debt, and of a further equity market correction. Third, there were signs   for example, from the Enron fallout, the just-announced Allied##NewPara##Irish Bank losses, and from Japan   of somewhat greater financial fragility, which might dampen asset prices, reducing wealth and increasing the cost of capital. Fourth, for some members the central projections for output and inflation were too high, as reported in Table .B of the Inflation Report; and the balance of risks for both was clearly on the downside. There was too much uncertainty for weight to be given to the implied projection beyond two years and thus to the slope of the projection at the##NewPara##two-year horizon. The arguments for delay did not appear convincing given that, despite the buoyancy of consumption, GDP was expected in the short term to remain growing at below trend and that the  main risk to consumption further out was on the downside. The upside risk to inflation from a possible sterling depreciation built into the published fan charts was not relevant to the immediate policy decision. The risks to sterling might not even be on the downside and the associated inflationary implications had almost certainly been overestimated. Moreover, if sterling did fall, there would be time to assess and react to the potential medium-term inflationary implications. The implications of imbalances for policy were not clear-cut. For example, not cutting rates because of concerns about growing household indebtedness might imply a higher exchange rate than otherwise, which could increase future inflation volatility. It would, therefore, be a mistake to keep interest rates higher because of the imbalances, as there was no compelling, commonly agreed reason to do so, and there was, therefore, a risk of compromising the transparency and predictability of policy. On that view, a further modest cut was, therefore, needed now in order to meet the inflation target, and there were no good tactical reasons for delay.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at %. Seven members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, David Clementi, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Stephen Nickell and Ian Plenderleith) voted in favour. Christopher Allsopp and Sushil Wadhwani voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.