The world economy##NewPara##Oil prices had dropped sharply over the past month, falling by nearly $ per barrel. This had been surprising, as most advance scenarios of the economic consequences of hostilities in Iraq   even those of a short war   had envisaged a pronounced upward spike in oil prices, at least in the initial phase. The price falls probably reflected there being less apparent damage to Iraqi oil fields than feared, increased oil production by OPEC, and better prospects for oil production in Venezuela and Nigeria. In any event, the price reductions unwound the increases since early December and were likely to benefit the United States in particular, given the strong pass-through from crude oil prices to retail gasoline prices there. Most major equity market indices had risen over the month, except in Japan: for example, the Wilshire was up over % and the Euro Stoxx up over %. Their movement during the month suggested that events in Iraq had played a part, with indices rising as uncertainty about events diminished in the run-up to hostilities, and then temporarily reversing when it looked as if the war might last longer than first thought. Higher equity prices suggested that investors had either revised upwards their assessment of future corporate earnings, or downwards the equity risk premium, or both. Higher short-term interest rates and bond yields also pointed to the same conclusion. Most increases in yields had been due more to increases in real rates than to higher inflation expectations, possibly reflecting portfolio shifts into equities.##NewPara##In contrast to developments in financial markets, news on the month about output, demand, and business and consumer confidence had indicated a weakening of the near-term economic outlook. In##NewPara##the United States, industrial production had increased by only .% in February. The Institute for Supply Management (ISM) indices for manufacturing and non-manufacturing had fallen sharply in March. In principle, the ISM indices reflected hard evidence about production, new orders, employment, inventories and supplier deliveries, although it was still possible that the responses to the ISM surveys had been coloured by wider worries about the prospect of war in Iraq. Most of the responses had been gathered prior to the outbreak of hostilities and the rise in equity markets.##NewPara##Consumption spending had been weak. The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimate of monthly consumption had fallen .% in February, after a reduction of .% in January, although bad weather on the east coast may have been partly responsible. Weekly data suggested that retail sales had faded in the second half of March, after a pick-up in the first half.  Consumer confidence had dropped on both the Conference Board measure (based on responses prior to the start of the war) and the Michigan measure, although there were signs of a rebound in the latter amongst those polled after the commencement of hostilities. Although there was still some scope for more mortgage equity withdrawal via refinancing, mortgage rates had edged up. It seemed less likely than it had in February that consumer spending would sustain US domestic demand until investment began to pick up. Labour market developments reinforced this doubt. Taking February and March together, non-farm payrolls fell by nearly half a million, and claims for unemployment insurance had increased slightly. Only a minority of the decline in non-farm payrolls was accounted for by the call-up of reservists in the armed forces (over , by mid-March, not all of whom would have been on those payrolls beforehand). According to the Conference Board survey, a higher proportion of households than at any time since  reported that jobs were hard to find. Labour market weakness now seemed more likely to persist. The Consensus forecast for US GDP growth in  had dipped . percentage points in March, to .%, and the most recent IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO) forecast was .%, down from .% last September.##NewPara##The Consensus forecast for euro-area GDP growth in  also fell . percentage points in March, to .%, the same as the latest WEO forecast. GDP in  Q, at .% on the first release, had been a little higher than expected, but it had probably been boosted to a greater extent than previously thought by temporary factors such as the impact of tax incentives on investment and the purchase of new cars in Italy, and flood-related construction spending in Germany. As in the United States, the latest indicators of activity had fallen back, with declines in the Purchasing Managers Indices for both manufacturing and services in March: both were now below the  level. The European Commission measure of industrial confidence had slipped further. Industrial production##NewPara##data showed a more mixed picture. There had been an increase of over % in January in the euro area as a whole, but the figures may have been exaggerated by seasonal factors; production had fallen sharply the month before. In February, German industrial production had fallen by .%. Retail sales had followed a similar pattern, with euro-area sales bouncing back in January but German sales falling off in February. Euro-area consumer confidence had declined for the sixth month running in March, reflecting concerns about both the general economic situation and individual job prospects; unemployment had risen in February. It remained difficult to identify what would give rise to a recovery in EU domestic demand in the near term, and the appreciation of the euro since the end of  would tend to weaken external demand.##NewPara##The indications from Japan were that the reported .% growth of GDP in  Q might indeed have marked some improvement in the Japanese economy. The METI  all-activity  index rose .% in January, more than reversing its December fall. The Consensus forecast for GDP growth in  had risen . percentage points in March, to .%.  The likely economic impact of the emergence of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in the rest of East Asia could not yet be assessed, although it was clear that air travel in the region had dropped off sharply.##NewTopic##Money, credit and financial market prices##NewPara##In the United Kingdom, as elsewhere, equity prices had been volatile, but indices had on average risen over the month, with, for example, the FTSE-All Share index up around % since the Committee s March meeting. Short-term movements had been positively correlated with changes in market interest rates, with both seeming to follow day-to-day news about developments in Iraq. There appeared to have been domestic as well as international influences affecting UK interest rates: one- year forward rates had increased significantly more than in the United States and the euro area. In particular, UK interest rates rose on publication of the minutes of the Committee s March meeting. Market anecdote suggested that the trigger had been the discussion in the minutes of the arguments for an increase in the repo rate, even though no member had supported such a move. That had contrasted with the fall in short-term money market rates that had taken place immediately after the February reduction in the repo rate. Judging by implied forward interest rates, participants now expected the turning point in the repo rate to arrive earlier than previously thought. Nevertheless, transactions volatility suggested that the sterling money market curve in early March might not have been as good a guide to expectations of future interest rates as usual.##NewPara##The greater rise in short-maturity money market interest rates in the United Kingdom than elsewhere might have been expected to have encouraged an appreciation of sterling. But in fact sterling had depreciated further   by around % on the effective measure. Last month, the Committee had considered three possible, not mutually exclusive, explanations for sterling s fall: first, a reassessment by market participants of how the Committee reacted to economic news; second, a downward revision in their estimates of the equilibrium real exchange rate expected in the medium term; and, third, a reduction in confidence due to assessments of the likely consequences of war in Iraq. The further fall in sterling this month, juxtaposed against the rise in UK interest rates relative to those abroad, provided evidence against the first hypothesis. And the increases in equity prices and short-term interest rates weighed against there having been a persistent  Iraq  effect, and therefore against the third hypothesis. An explanation in terms of a lower expected equilibrium real exchange rate seemed more likely. It was suggested that the fall could have been due to a perceived worsening of the outlook for UK domestic demand (relative to other countries). There had indeed recently been more discussion of this possibility, for example in the IMF s World Economic Outlook. Such a shift would mean that a lower real exchange rate was necessary to boost external demand and hence bring total demand back into line with the United Kingdom s supply capacity, as would be expected in the long run in the absence of further shocks. Another possible reason for a lower equilibrium real exchange rate was that the share of UK domestic demand spent on imports might be increasing faster than ONS statistics reported (putting downward pressure on sterling via the current account); in this context, it was notable that the rest of the EU reported more exports to the United Kingdom than the ONS recorded as UK imports, although it was unclear why any perception that UK imports were being underreported would have affected sterling suddenly in the recent past. Several ways in which an adjustment in the real exchange rate could be brought about were considered. One mechanism was through the adjustment of capital flows. For example, overseas investors might have been anticipating the lower growth of domestic demand and the resulting lower profits (at least in the short run) by reducing direct investment. Or, there might have been an increased demand from the UK for foreign financial assets. Even without a shock to domestic demand, investors might have reduced the desired weight of sterling assets (including direct investment) in their portfolios, perhaps because of a general tendency to repatriate capital at a time of international uncertainty.  In any event, the likelihood that the recent depreciation of sterling would persist was probably higher than had been thought last month.##NewPara##The growth rate of broad money had picked up a little in February, as had that of narrow money in March. There had been some signs of a decline in bank borrowing by non-financial firms.##NewPara##Although the annual growth rate of non-financial corporate borrowing had increased, the monthly flow had eased back compared with the average monthly flow in  Q. It looked likely that total new external finance by companies would be lower in  Q than in the previous quarter. That could have reflected some combination of lower costs, lower investment, lower dividends, higher revenues and, conceivably, the impact of tighter borrowing constraints imposed by lenders. Firms had been strengthening their balance sheets and the corporate sector as a whole ran a financial surplus last year. Eventually, stronger balance sheets might encourage investment, but in the near future firms might want to increase their net saving further, for example to offset the widespread increase in deficits in company defined-benefit pension funds, and that might mean further cuts in planned investment, dividends and employment. Companies in declining sectors of the economy had particularly tough challenges in financing defined-benefit pension funds. Outside the oil sector, there had been few signs of an increase in gross trading profits.##NewPara##The monthly flow of new borrowing by households   both secured and unsecured   had also fallen back a little from the average in the fourth quarter last year. But these rates were still high by historical standards. Mortgage equity withdrawal as a proportion of personal disposable income was almost as high at the end of last year as in the housing boom of the late s. Two-year fixed-rate mortgage rates were lower than they had been in February. There were few signs from the borrowing data that consumption growth would be weak. However, the path of total household borrowing was not necessarily a good guide to the path of consumption in the short term, not least because of the heterogeneity of households; for example, borrowing had accelerated in  while consumption growth had fallen slightly. Borrowing could be used to finance the purchase of assets by households as well as consumption of goods and services. Borrowing could also be undertaken to maintain consumption in the face of slower growth in disposable incomes. The Committee s February central projection had indeed envisaged a fall in the household sector s saving ratio in the short run.##NewPara##So far this year, house price inflation had fallen a little more than the Committee had projected at the time of the February Inflation Report, with the three-month-on-three-month rates of increase of house prices running at between % and  % according to the Halifax and Nationwide indices. The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors survey indicated that price increases had moderated further##NewPara##and were likely to decline even more. Indicators of the volume of activity also suggested that a slowdown was under way in the housing market.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The estimate of GDP growth in the final quarter of  was unchanged in the latest ONS release. As a result of data revisions, it now looked as if consumption and business investment had been higher than previously thought, and it seemed more likely that investment might have stabilised. The upward revisions to domestic demand were offset by an upward revision to imports.##NewPara##Output in  Q was likely to have been lower than expected at the time of the February Inflation Report. In March, the CIPS private services activity index had dropped below , after several months of falls, and it was likely that private services sector growth had been considerably weaker in the first quarter of this year than in  Q. The picture for manufacturing was more confused. According to the index of production, manufacturing output growth had held up, increasing by .% in January (largely because of production of computers) and by .% in February (with increases more broadly based across sectors). But both the CIPS and CBI surveys for March suggested that there had been a sharp deterioration subsequently. These surveys asked respondents about output and orders, not business sentiment, so in principle they should not have been biased by any concern about the increase in international political tension unless reflected in reduced or delayed activity. In the past, the CIPS responses had sometimes given a misleading signal about output, but more because of inadequate industry coverage (such as under-representation of expanding ICT firms during the slowdown of the late  s) than because of bias due to confidence effects.##NewPara##There had been further signs of a slowdown in household spending. Retail sales had fallen by .% in February, suggesting that the reported weakness in January was not due simply to difficulties in applying seasonal adjustment to the data around Christmas. VAT receipts had been unexpectedly low in February. CIPS survey data pointed to a fall in output of manufactured consumption goods in March. The CBI Distributive Trades survey s balance for retail volumes fell sharply in March,  although this might to some extent have reflected the fact that Easter falls later this year than last, so that the holiday spending period falls in April instead of March. Private sales of cars were relatively strong in March. Consumer confidence had changed little in March after its decline in recent months, and the weakness continued to reflect concerns about the general economic situation more than##NewPara##households  own economic circumstances, although the latter had also weakened somewhat. Publicity given to the slowdown in house prices since Christmas may have contributed to the weakness. The impact of the war in Iraq was uncertain.  The path of consumption had been little affected by the earlier Gulf War and the Falklands campaign, but it was possible that there was more concern over security, especially in city centres, during the present hostilities. Consistent with this, sales within the M appeared to have fallen disproportionately.##NewPara##Overall, it now seemed likely that consumption growth in  Q had been considerably lower than envisaged in the February Inflation Report, and below its long-run trend. The question was, looking forward, what were the implications of the apparent weakness of consumption in the first quarter? There were three possibilities.  First, the weakness might have been erratic, and might quickly reverse as some of the uncertainties about the consequences of the war in Iraq were resolved. Second, consumption had been expected to slow from the second quarter onwards as higher National Insurance contributions and Council Tax reduced disposable income growth. It was possible that the weakness might simply have reflected an earlier-than-predicted arrival of this expected slowdown, as consumers anticipated the imminent reduction in the growth of their disposable income. Third, it could have been the sign of a downward revision to consumers  estimates of their income over the long run for some other reasons, in which case further falls could be expected later when the higher National Insurance contributions and Council Tax affected disposable income. Assessing the outlook for consumption was complicated by the difficulty in forecasting real disposable income due to the divergence between the personal consumption deflator and RPIX.##NewPara##Turning to the other components of demand, the Treasury briefing suggested that the Budget had relatively mild implications for the expected profile of government spending, but a more thorough analysis would be possible during the forthcoming forecast round. A range of measures to raise potential output had also been announced in the Budget, but any effects were likely to be modest over the time horizon relevant to the Committee s decision. Export demand had been significantly weaker than expected in February, especially to non-EU countries. This was consistent with the weak data on demand in the United Kingdom s major trading partners, and perhaps made earlier falls in reported exports more plausible. But it was clear that the puzzles surrounding the trade data remained.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##In general, the labour market appeared to remain reasonably robust. The unemployment rate on the Labour Force Survey measure had fallen to .% in the three months to January, and it was likely that it would turn out to have been lower in the first quarter than assumed in the Committee s central projection in February. Employment had increased by , in the same period. The CIPS employment survey suggested that there had continued to be net job losses from the private sector in March, but the Workforce Jobs data showed that public sector employment had continued to grow in  Q. Labour supply also depended on the hours worked by members of the labour force. Total and average hours worked had fallen in Q. A special survey by the Bank s regional Agents had reported a trend across all sectors for average weekly hours worked to fall, partly because of the impact of legislation, and partly because of pressure from existing and prospective employees.  The fall thus did not seem to be a purely cyclical effect, the consequence of firms hoarding labour in the expectation of an early recovery in demand.  Hence any shake-out of labour in the event of a protracted period of lower-than-expected growth was likely to be less than might previously have been forecast. The impact on wage costs was unclear; it depended on whether the fall in average hours pushed up average hourly pay (as it would, for example, if weekly pay was not affected) or reduced it (as it would tend to if fewer hours were worked at overtime rates).##NewPara##The growth of pay (excluding bonuses) was much the same in the year to January as in the year to December, and wage settlements, at .% in February, continued to be remarkably stable. The increases in National Insurance contributions came into effect this month, and data on April settlements were likely to help in assessing their impact. So far, there had been little sign of employees trying to compensate for their increased contributions by demanding higher pay settlements. Nor did there seem to have been a reaction to the upward movement in RPI inflation over recent months. That might be because of confidence that the inflation rate would be anchored at around  % by monetary policy. There was also a possibility that employers would have agreed higher settlements had it not been for the increase in their National Insurance contributions.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##The annual rate of RPIX inflation was % in February, a little higher than had been expected by the Committee. The main surprise had been clothing and footwear prices, which had been higher than##NewPara##expected for a couple of months now. Last month, the increases could be regarded as spurious, the likely result of a change in the collection date for RPI data relative to the timing of post-Christmas sales, but it was now more difficult to dismiss them.##NewPara##As the Committee had noted previously, the profile of RPIX inflation in the near term would be raised by a number of temporary factors. The impact of higher retail petrol prices discussed last month was now likely to be short-lived given that sterling oil prices had fallen by around % since the Committee s March meeting. That fall would reduce inflation projections (relative to last month s) by around . percentage points in the near term, but, because the two-year-ahead futures price of oil had remained unchanged, there was now likely to be a higher mechanical contribution to the annual rate of inflation further out. However, because of sterling depreciation during the first quarter, this year s large Council Tax increases and the temporarily high housing depreciation component, annual RPIX inflation was still likely to increase over the forthcoming quarter. Thereafter, it was likely to fall gradually, as house price increases moderated and the price level effect of the Council Tax fell out of annual comparisons.##NewPara##One of the major uncertainties over the forecast horizon was how large and how long-lasting the impact on retail prices of the % depreciation in sterling since the February Inflation Report would be. A purely mechanical simulation with the Bank s medium-term macroeconometric model suggested that it could add somewhere between a half and one percentage point to inflation during .  But that depended on several factors, including the impact on the wholesale prices of imports, the pass- through from wholesale import prices to retail prices, the effect of any price increases on wage bargainers  and price setters  inflation expectations, and the size of the stimulus to UK net exports. Threshold effects might be important, with little change in prices for moderate falls in sterling. Recent international evidence suggested that the pass-through to retail prices might be less now than in the past. Direct price effects were likely to be the most important factors in the short run, while indirect effects via the impact on aggregate demand and inflation expectations would tend to build up more gradually. The overall effect on the price level might be spread out over a lengthy period.##NewPara##Two other issues relating to price setting were discussed. First, wage bargainers  and price setters  reactions to movements in the components of RPIX might depend on the particular components in question. For example, changes in Council Tax and petrol prices might be more visible and receive greater media coverage than changes in the housing depreciation component of RPI.##NewPara##Although RPI was widely used as a benchmark for wage negotiations, in practice it was not clear that it was the most relevant index to help explain actual wage settlements; the link had become weaker since the beginning of the s. Second, reactions to changes in inflation also depended on how wage bargainers and price setters thought that the monetary policy authorities would react. In particular, the degree to which the Committee was expected to accommodate apparently temporary shocks to inflation (but permanent shocks to the price level) would be important.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The Reuters poll of economists suggested that there were slightly higher expectations of a rate change this month than last, but a mean probability of just over % was attached to there being no change in the repo rate. Most expected a reduction in May. Market anecdote was that a reduction this month might be taken as an indication that interest rates would follow a lower path than previously thought. As the Committee s meeting was taking place immediately after the Budget, there was also a possibility that any change in the repo rate would mistakenly be seen as a commentary on the Budget rather than as a response to a wide range of data.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Although a gradual recovery in the world economy was still likely in the medium term, the Committee agreed that the global outlook currently seemed somewhat weaker than at the time of the February Inflation Report. Economic forecasts of GDP growth in  had been revised down. Surveys of business and consumer confidence had been particularly pessimistic about the near-term outlook. They may have been affected by increased uncertainty due to the situation in Iraq. However, not all the news on the month had been bad for the world outlook. In particular, the drop in oil prices and the increases in equity prices around the world in the second half of the month would tend to stimulate activity.  It was not yet clear to what extent there might be a rebound in confidence as a result of the likely early conclusion of the war in Iraq. In the United Kingdom, evidence was accumulating that the anticipated slowdown in consumption growth was under way, although its extent was still uncertain. The question was whether investment, external demand and public sector spending would pick up fast enough to keep aggregate demand broadly in line with potential supply. The depreciation of sterling would help in this regard, as would stronger equities and lower oil prices. In addition, the Committee had to consider a situation in which, for a while, UK inflation was likely to be##NewPara##above target, albeit as a result of a range of temporary factors likely to unwind in the coming year, and growth might be below trend.##NewPara##In the light of the evidence about global and domestic demand and prices, the Committee considered arguments for reducing the repo rate or maintaining it at the current level. Committee members differed in how persuasive they found each of these to be.##NewPara##There were a number of possible reasons for a reduction. First, the world economy had been weaker than expected and the outlook seemed to have deteriorated. In particular, data from the United States had been weaker. It was difficult to know what weight to put on survey data at the current conjuncture because of the war in Iraq, but, arguably, it was unlikely that the downturn in indicators was all war-related. Demand for euro-area exports, for example, would be affected by the recent past appreciation of the euro for some time. Second, it looked likely that UK output had been lower in the first quarter than expected and the signs were that demand for UK goods and services was slowing. Consumer spending was likely to reflect the weakness of retail sales, the slightly faster-than-expected slowing of house prices, and the fact that the rate of consumer borrowing had apparently passed its peak. Although firms seemed to be strengthening their balance sheets, there was no guarantee that this would be reflected in increased investment in the near term. Reported exports had been repeatedly weaker than expected. In the context of weak global demand, it was not clear that the fall in the exchange rate would boost net trade sufficiently to keep aggregate demand growing broadly in line with potential supply. This news about output and demand contained valuable information about the level of inflation in the future, and it was particularly desirable for the Committee to react promptly. Third, given the likely behaviour of house and oil prices, the contribution of these factors to measured inflation was likely to fall significantly over the next year. Fourth, pay settlements, particularly in the private sector, implied lower increases in real wages. Fifth, the risks to inflation entailed by maintaining an interest rate that was too tight were greater at present than the risks entailed by reducing rates, given the degree of spare capacity in the economy thought to exist by some Committee members.##NewPara##There were also arguments in favour of maintaining the current repo rate and, for most Committee members, these, taken together, were more convincing. First, the news about output and demand was ambiguous. Consumption and business investment had been higher than expected in  Q, and unemployment had remained low. Manufacturing output had been unexpectedly strong##NewPara##in February. The export data had been weak but were difficult to reconcile with other sources of information. The fall in the price of oil would tend to stimulate activity. The rise in equity markets would help to sustain consumption, which was not necessarily slowing faster than the Committee had expected: the retail sales position was complicated by the lateness of Easter this year; the deceleration in house prices had been tentative and rates of increase were still high in many regions; and household borrowing was still at historically high levels, supported by further increases in house prices and by the low real interest rates facing consumers. The war in Iraq had increased the difficulty of interpreting survey responses, probably making them unduly pessimistic but to an unknown extent. It looked##NewPara##likely at the moment that the war would be over quickly, so that uncertainty from this source would be less next month; hence, on this occasion, a delay should help clarify the underlying picture for the Committee. Second, the decline in the sterling exchange rate had persisted, despite an increase during the month in UK interest rates relative to the rest of the world, and largely independently of movements in the dollar-euro rate.  This would tend to raise prices both directly, even though the speed and degree of pass-through to retail prices was uncertain, and indirectly, via the boost it would give to net external demand. Third, it was important not to let inflation expectations drift upwards away from the target. While there was little sign of this happening at the moment, the expected increase in inflation in the short run, even though it was largely due to transient factors, might affect expectations of inflation further ahead. There was more of a risk that any impact of sterling s depreciation would be amplified by further wage and price adjustments if the credibility of the target were dented. Policy would be less effective if reductions in the repo rate were to trigger rises in inflation expectations and hence rises in the yield curve further out, as might have happened to a limited extent after the February reduction. Fourth, there were a number of issues that would benefit from further analysis in the context of the forecast round leading up to the May Inflation Report, such as the probable extent of exchange-rate pass-through, the quality of trade statistics, the impact of the Budget, and the implications of the decline in average hours worked. It was not clear at this stage what the Committee would conclude about these issues, and hence what the consequences would be for the inflation projection.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. Seven members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, Andrew Large, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Stephen Nickell and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. Christopher Allsopp and Marian Bell voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.