Underlying issues##NewPara##The Committee reviewed two long-standing issues crucial to the assessment of the risks to the outlook for the UK economy: first, the relationship between net external demand, output growth and the exchange rate; second, the relationship between consumption growth, asset prices, household borrowing and debt. An important feature in both cases was the changes in relative prices (including the terms of trade   the price of exports relative to imports, in sterling terms) that had taken place over recent years. The sustainability of the outlook depended in part on whether or not those changes would persist.##NewPara##The external position did not seem to be an immediate cause for concern, at least in nominal terms. The current account deficit was not unusually large   it was close to its forty-year average   and was not increasing at all rapidly. However, the trade balance, and the contribution of net trade to GDP growth (measured at constant prices), had deteriorated markedly. The key question was the extent to which the improvement in the terms of trade in the past few years, which helped reconcile these two perspectives, would be sustained.##NewPara##The current account position could be sustainable so long as those sectors with tradable outputs could maintain their share of export markets, despite in some cases doing so at low margins, and, over time, rebuild their margins by cutting costs and improving productivity. Further exit of firms from the UK production of manufactured goods might, however, worsen the current account and increase the risk of a depreciation in sterling s exchange rate. An alternative assessment was that the manufacturing sector in the United Kingdom had been shrinking since the mid-s, and rates of##NewPara##return in manufacturing had been lower in the s and s than they were today. The higher levels of profitability in the mid-s had, on this assessment, been atypical and, even then, the profitability of manufacturing had been lower than that of services. The exit of firms from unprofitable sectors did not necessarily imply that the current account position would worsen: other, more profitable, activities for which there was external demand could be expected to develop in their place. The share of output accounted for by manufacturing remained higher in the United Kingdom than it was in, for example, the United States and the displacement of low value-added activities to countries with lower labour costs was not confined to the United Kingdom. So the weak profitability of manufacturing could be interpreted as a symptom of a long-term shift in comparative advantage, to which the economy was slowly adjusting, rather than of a short-term imbalance which would at some point become unsustainable. On this analysis, the exchange rate need not fall over the medium term. And, even if it did, there remained a question about whether the terms of trade would also deteriorate; that is, whether import prices would rise relative to export prices. There was some evidence that there had been a structural improvement in the United Kingdom s terms of trade; and, as in other countries, changes in the exchange rate now seemed to pass through less readily than in the past to domestic producer and retail prices. Committee members agreed that there were elements of truth in both analyses of the United Kingdom s current account position, although they differed somewhat in the relative weight they attached to them.##NewPara##The household sector s position was to some extent linked to the factors driving the external balance: consumption could probably not have grown so rapidly, had the terms of trade not improved and, by doing so, boosted real incomes. Households could in effect have based their consumption decisions over this period on a belief that the recent improvement in the terms of trade would be maintained. If so, it was natural to expect a period of relatively rapid consumption growth, financed in part by higher levels of borrowing and a consequent accumulation of debt, as consumers adjusted to the higher level of consumption that they now expected to be able to sustain. This might plausibly be accompanied by additional spending on durable goods, and so should be followed by a period of somewhat slower consumption growth once that adjustment to the stock of durables was complete. A reversal of the terms of trade improvement could precipitate a sharp change in consumer behaviour; it could, alternatively, lead to a similarly extended period of rather slower consumption growth.##NewPara##As with the external balance, and partly reflecting the terms of trade improvement, the household sector s position and its implications looked different, depending on whether it was assessed at##NewPara##constant or current prices. The increase in the share of consumption in total GDP was less marked in current prices, as relative prices had moved in consumers  favour. Household sector financial flows were close to balance; and the saving ratio was above its long-term average in inflation-adjusted terms. Both these facts supported a relatively benign interpretation of the household sector s financial position, as did the rise in net housing equity. Aggregate household borrowing and indebtedness had, however, increased markedly in relation to income and financial wealth. This was a greater cause for concern. Although households had in aggregate acquired additional financial assets at a rate which broadly matched their increasing liabilities, the falls in equity market prices had at the same time eroded the value of their existing financial asset holdings. Households  indebtedness had also increased markedly relative to the value of their liquid assets. This increased the risks of abrupt balance sheet adjustment, should households  economic position deteriorate.##NewPara##These were clearly complex issues, which the Committee would need to revisit.##NewTopic##The world economy##NewPara##The Committee reviewed the uncertainties, for the world economic outlook and for the United Kingdom, engendered by current geopolitical concerns and the possibility of war in Iraq. The sharp falls in consumer confidence might be associated with such worries, as it was consumers  concerns about the general economic situation, rather than about their own financial position, that seemed to have been most affected.  That was consistent with movements in the price of gold, which had risen not only in dollar, but also in euro, terms (and so was not simply a reflection of recent dollar weakness). Recent falls in business confidence, and perhaps also in equity markets, might also reflect those concerns. But it was difficult to distinguish between the effect of these influences and unrelated concerns that there might be about the longer-term economic outlook, which would manifest themselves in similar ways. Even short-lived changes in sentiment could nonetheless affect behaviour, notably by delaying firms  planned investment, at least until the present uncertainties were resolved.##NewPara##The Committee s latest projections assumed by convention that equity prices would rise from their current level in line with nominal GDP, and that the effects on activity and prices of their recent fall would be typical of past experience. The variance of the projections had been increased, however, to recognise the added uncertainties in the general outlook. No assumptions had been made in the##NewPara##central projection about what the economic effects of a conflict might be, as those depended on its extent, duration and outcome   all of which were highly uncertain.##NewPara##The latest data on the United States were mixed, and somewhat weaker than had been embodied in the Committee s November projections. GDP was estimated to have grown by only .% in the fourth quarter of  and consumption growth had slowed. Consumer confidence had weakened, probably in part associated with worries about possible conflict in Iraq, although the continuing fall in employment could also be a factor. The pick-up in investment   the first for two years   was, however, encouraging. The non-manufacturing sector business activity index in the ISM survey had strengthened in January, and the headline manufacturing sector index, while slightly lower on the month, remained strong. On balance, the prospect for the United States, though somewhat fragile and a little weaker in the near term than had seemed likely three months ago, remained one of moderate sustained recovery.##NewPara##Recent news from the euro area was disappointing and activity there continued to fall short of expectations. The further appreciation of the euro exchange rate had weakened the outlook for euro- area net trade, and final domestic demand growth remained very sluggish. Data from Germany, notably on unemployment, had been weak and did not suggest that recovery there was imminent. In Japan, too, the data had been disappointing and it seemed possible that the apparent recovery earlier in  might falter. Elsewhere in Asia, however, the signs were more positive: China in particular was performing strongly   as indeed were a number of other emerging market countries.##NewPara##There had been substantial falls in many of the major international equity indices since the Committee s previous meeting: the Wilshire  had fallen by nearly %, the FTSE All Share by over % and the Dow Jones Euro Stoxx by around %. The uniformity of these falls, in local currency terms, pointed to a common cause. The lack of substantial economic or corporate news over that period suggested that geopolitical concerns were largely responsible.  But the dollar had fallen by about %, and sterling by over %, against the euro, so there was less uniformity in these equity price movements in common currency terms. To the extent that prices in each market were determined by international investors with a diversified portfolio of holdings and no  home market  bias, this suggested that there might be other factors at work. The UK market, for example, might have been adversely affected by equity divestment by life companies and by market fears of future tax increases.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##The annual growth rate of notes and coin had eased in recent months and again in January, as had that of household M and household Divisia since the summer. This was consistent with some slowing in the pace of nominal consumption growth. Household credit continued to accelerate on an annual basis, although households  borrowing for consumption, as a proportion of their disposable income, had probably stabilised in the fourth quarter (but at a high level). Mortgage equity withdrawal as a share of personal disposable income seemed likely to have increased further in the fourth quarter, but this had been partially offset by a smaller flow of (new) unsecured borrowing than in the previous quarter. House prices continued to increase strongly, but the increases in annual house price inflation obscured the fact that there were a number of indicators suggesting that the monthly rate of increase was now slowing. Latest outturns were consistent with the short-term profile embodied in the Committee s latest projections. There was some evidence, for example in early indications of the price expectations balance in the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors  housing market survey and in the number of mortgage loan approvals, that housing market activity was also beginning to ease, though this was not conclusive.##NewPara##The corporate sector now seemed to be increasing its borrowing from banks quite strongly and its overall external borrowing had increased since the first half of the year. The implications for business investment were, in current circumstances, particularly hard to read.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The ONS s preliminary estimate for GDP growth in the fourth quarter was .%, a little below the Committee s expectations. The prospect for GDP growth in  as a whole, embodied in the projections to be published in the February Inflation Report, was around half a percentage point lower than in the November projections.##NewPara##The data on production and manufacturing output in December, which were available to the Committee at its meeting, showed a fall on the month in both cases. Whereas manufacturing output had appeared to be broadly flat last summer, once due account was taken of the effects of the Jubilee holidays on the monthly pattern of output, the underlying trend now seemed to be downwards. A further fall was embodied in the projection for the first quarter of . Survey information about the##NewPara##immediate outlook was mixed. The latest surveys by the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) indicated that output and orders were weaker than in late summer, in both manufacturing and services. Surveys by the CBI and the BCC were, in contrast, more positive: both showed balances for manufacturers  new orders and expected output which were around their long-run averages, and the BCC survey pointed to improved demand growth in the services sector. The net trade position in the fourth quarter was, however, much weaker than expected. Exports of goods had, on current ONS estimates, fallen sharply in October and November. This was hard to explain in terms of their usual determinants or to reconcile with other data sources and with survey information. It was possible that data revisions would tend to reduce this apparent weakness, as had often been the case with such large movements in the past, and that there would be some offsetting pick-up in the coming months. Even so, it was unlikely that all this weakness in exports would prove to be temporary.##NewPara##Retail sales volumes had increased by just over % in December and by nearly % in the fourth quarter as a whole, more than double the growth in the third quarter. While this suggested robust consumption growth, it was widely reported that these volume increases had been associated with heavy price discounting: the growth in the value of sales had eased. But the substantial seasonal variation in sales at this time of year made the underlying trends particularly uncertain. Monetary indicators were, arguably, more consistent with a modest easing in nominal consumption growth. The falls in consumer confidence in the past two months had mainly been in the  general conditions  indicator and so were probably linked to gloomy economic commentary and to worries about the possibility of military conflict in Iraq. Even so, it was possible that consumer behaviour could be affected.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Employment, as measured by the Labour Force Survey (LFS), had increased quite strongly in the three months to November, with a much larger share accounted for by full-time workers than for some months. Much of the increase in employment was accounted for by a corresponding fall in inactivity, so unemployment had fallen only slightly, on both the LFS measure and the claimant count.  The fall in LFS unemployment had been more than accounted for by short-term unemployment, and the rate of inflows to the claimant count was little changed. Taken together, these data suggested a broadly stable labour market picture.##NewPara##Though earnings growth in the public sector had picked up again, largely reflecting the delayed local authority pay settlement, private sector earnings growth continued to ease. The outlook for pay settlements in the coming months, in which the majority of annual deals take effect, remained benign. The Treasury representative outlined the broad terms of the Pay Review Body awards that would be announced soon after the Committee s meeting and covered employees representing about % of the public sector paybill. The awards for these groups were on average for increases of about half a percentage point less than those made last year. A special survey by Bank s Agents had confirmed the results of other recent surveys of private sector pay prospects in suggesting that settlements would be only modestly above those of last year. This was despite the higher rate of RPI inflation (often a benchmark for pay deals) and the imminent increase in employee National Insurance contributions. The Agents  survey had at the same time suggested a rather larger increase in overall labour costs. That probably reflected firms  concerns about the cost of pension provision and the increase in employers  National Insurance costs, which should not affect firms  longer-term employment decisions but would nonetheless make them more resistant to pressures to increase rates of pay.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Following the increases towards the end of last year, sterling spot oil prices had increased by about % since the Committee s previous meeting and had been % higher on average in January than in December. Oil futures prices had also increased, albeit more modestly. This increase in spot prices was surprisingly small, if it was a result of concerns about conflict in the Middle East and the consequent risks to oil supplies, and it seemed to be inconsistent with the extent to which equity prices and business and consumer sentiment appeared to have been affected. It might be that any short-term impact associated with current supply conditions and the possibility of conflict in Iraq was being offset by changes in views about the level at which the price of oil would settle in the longer term, once production in Venezuela had been restored to normal levels.##NewPara##RPIX inflation was .% in December and had increased by . percentage points since September, the latest data available at the time of the November Inflation Report. This increase, though substantial, was in line with the Committee s expectation, and reflected the marked increase in the contributions from housing depreciation and from petrol prices (which had been temporarily weak a year earlier). The Committee s expectation of RPIX outturns over the next few months was a little above what it had been in November. The main additional near-term uncertainty was about the extent##NewPara##of temporary price discounting. The pronounced volatility of annual RPIX inflation during , which had in part reflected the unwinding of the previous year s price shocks, was unlikely to be repeated in .##NewTopic##The February GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections to be published in the##NewPara##On the assumption of an unchanged official repo rate of .% over the next two years, the central projection would have been for a gradual easing of inflationary pressure in the medium term with RPIX inflation slightly below the  % target by the two-year horizon and continuing to fall.##NewPara##On an alternative assumption of an official repo rate of .% over the next two years, the central projection was for GDP growth to edge up to around trend during the first half of this year but to slow a little thereafter. The central projection for RPIX inflation was for it to rise further above target in the near term but to fall back towards the end of this year and during , settling at around the target by the two-year forecast horizon. The Committee judged that the range of possible outcomes was particularly large at present, given the additional uncertainties surrounding the prospect of military conflict in Iraq, and this was reflected in the variance of the projections. Most of the major risks were, taken together, broadly balanced around the central projection. In the Inflation Report fan charts, however, the overall balance of risks to the central projection for GDP was weighted marginally on the downside, and that to the RPIX inflation projection slightly to the upside. This reflected the possibility that the central projection might understate the effect of the previously announced increase in National Insurance contributions which would be implemented in April.##NewPara##Bearing in mind the major uncertainties, Committee members held a range of views on the central projection, particularly regarding the speed with which inflation would moderate in the second year of the projection, and on the overall balance of risks. The range of opinion was nevertheless relatively narrow.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The outlook for world activity was weaker than it had been three months ago, though the deterioration on the month had been more modest. A moderate recovery remained the most likely prospect in the United States, but domestic demand growth in the euro area remained sluggish and the prospects there were less encouraging. In the United Kingdom, final demand was now expected to grow more slowly   partly reflecting the weaker world outlook, partly the effect of lower equity prices and the less favourable outlook for investment and, to a lesser extent, consumption. The impact of these demand-side influences on inflation was, however, offset   in the short term at least   by the fall in sterling s exchange rate and by higher oil and house prices. But the main news on the month was the weaker GDP outturns in the United States and the United Kingdom, the further falls in equity prices and the weakening in business and consumer sentiment, both in the United Kingdom and abroad. It was unclear whether this simply reflected increased nervousness about the prospect of military conflict in Iraq, and so might prove temporary, or more deep-seated economic weakness; and, even if it did prove temporary, whether it would nevertheless bring forward the expected slowing in consumption growth.##NewPara##There were various arguments for maintaining the repo rate at .% this month, given different weight by different members. First, the projections based on a constant repo rate of %, with inflation above target for most of the period and only very slightly below it at the two year horizon, were consistent with either no change in the rate or with a reduction of  basis points. Second, consumption growth and house price inflation were projected to slow quite quickly. Given it was not yet clear that that slowdown was well-established, a reduction in interest rates at this meeting could delay it. Related to that, borrowing had in any case become more attractive over the past year even without changes in official interest rates: spreads had fallen, banks were keen to lend and there was significant competitive pressure to do so. A modest reduction in the repo rate was unlikely to have much impact on business investment or output. But any signal of an easier interest rate environment could prompt further, unsustainable, accumulation of debt by households, potentially exacerbating the subsequent adjustment and complicating the operation of monetary policy. Third, the dip in business and consumer sentiment could prove to be temporary, and might not in fact signal that the economic fundamentals had weakened. If this change in sentiment were indeed a reflection of uncertainties about the prospect and economic implications of military action, it was possible that it might not in fact affect behaviour as much as was embodied in the projections; nor was it clear that a reduction in##NewPara##interest rates would be effective in offsetting such effects. Fourth, there was a risk that inflation expectations could become less firmly anchored to the  % level at which they appeared, encouragingly, to have settled. RPIX inflation was already above target and was expected to remain so for some months. A further upward shock to the oil price could push inflation above %. That might then cast doubt on whether the inflation target would be met in the medium term. Fifth, the markets were not expecting a reduction in the repo rate at this month s meeting and it would be unwise to lead market expectations down. An unexpected reduction could in current circumstances suggest that the outlook was worse than market participants currently believed and so could, perversely, reinforce the gloomy mood. Finally, without a change in official rates, money market rates and bond yields had already fallen substantially in recent months, easing credit conditions. It was not clear to some members that this (for example, the fall in the medium-to-longer rates relevant for fixed-rate mortgages) was fully reflected in the Committee s projections. It would in their view offset to some extent the adverse news about demand. Some members concluded that, weighing these various arguments, there was no pressing need to reduce official rates this month. There was time to wait, to see whether consumption was in fact slowing as projected, and whether the recent changes in sentiment would unwind as news emerged about the possibility of military action and its economic effects. Maintaining the repo rate at % preserved the maximum scope for action.##NewPara##There were also various arguments for a reduction in interest rates this month, which most members felt were on balance decisive but to which they gave different weights. First, for some members, the forecast itself suggested that a reduction in interest rates was necessary. Although RPIX inflation was expected to increase in the coming months, this was largely the result of temporary factors which would unwind and which were not related to underlying inflationary pressures in the economy. In this context, it was also appropriate, in some members  view, to accommodate the direct first-round effects on the price level of the recent fall in the exchange rate. Output growth was projected to be noticeably weaker than in November and there had, in the view of some members, been significant downside news on the month. Output was falling below supply potential during the second year of the projection, and domestically generated inflationary pressures were muted. Some members felt that inflationary pressures might be weaker than embodied in the projection; it was possible that the near-term pick-up in inflation would not be as persistent as was projected, or feed through substantially to wage settlements. Looking ahead to the second year of the projection and beyond justified pre-emptive action now, to offset the prospective weakness in demand and so to keep inflation close to target in the medium term. Second, output   especially in manufacturing   was weaker than##NewPara##expected and recent export data might be more representative of underlying external demand than the projections allowed. Equity prices had fallen and business sentiment was weaker. While a small reduction in interest rates might not boost investment spending significantly, nor lower the exchange rate (and thereby improve the net trade position), it would reduce producers  costs. At a time when those costs were increasing, not least because of the imminent increase in National Insurance contributions, that would provide some relief for profit margins and lessen the risk that firms in the tradable sectors and with good longer-term prospects might be forced out of business. Third, there were now some indications that consumption growth was slowing and that house price inflation was beginning to ease. A small reduction in interest rates seemed unlikely to increase the upside risks to inflation materially. Some members argued that the current rapid pace of house price inflation was in any case being driven more by the general expectation of a stable and growing economy than by the level of interest rates. Finally, some members doubted that the recent falls in equity prices and in business and consumer sentiment would quickly be reversed, even if the current geopolitical uncertainties were resolved favourably.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be reduced by  basis points to .%. Seven members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, Christopher Allsopp, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Marian Bell and Stephen Nickell) voted in favour. Andrew Large and Paul Tucker voted against, preferring to maintain the repo rate at .%.