The world economy##NewPara##Economic prospects for  had continued to improve in the United States. GDP growth in  Q had been revised up from .% over the previous quarter to .%. The central tendency of the forecast of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank Presidents was for growth of  % - % between  Q and  Q, which was somewhat higher than the MPC s own projection at the time of the February Inflation Report. The Consensus forecast for  had risen. The latest survey indices from the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) had increased in February, from##NewPara##. to . in manufacturing and from . to . in non-manufacturing. The new orders component of the manufacturing index was over , suggesting that strong growth of production was in prospect. Shipments of capital goods in January had been significantly higher than on average in  Q.  This evidence suggested that excess capacity would inhibit investment less than it had over the past year. Initial jobless claims were lower. Productivity had been growing very strongly at the end of last year, and this would help to restrain inflation. Against this positive evidence, it was noted that both the Conference Board and the Michigan surveys of consumer confidence had fallen a little in February.##NewPara##While prospects for  were stronger, the longer-term picture was less clear. It was possible that the speed of the incipient recovery could reflect a bounceback from the rapid destocking which took place in , and from the temporary effect of the terrorist attacks in September, rather than a return to a sustained long-run growth path. Going further forward, uncertainties remained, with persistent imbalances between domestic and traded sectors. The current account was in substantial deficit, and the household debt servicing burden had risen to an historically high level despite low interest rates.  It was too early to assess the likely macroeconomic impact of the recent announcement of increased tariffs on some imported steel. It was encouraging that there did not appear to have been any general effect on business confidence from the Enron affair; but equity prices still implied a long-term rate of earnings growth that seemed implausibly high. Moreover, US##NewPara##reports suggested that in the first three quarters of , the companies comprising the NASDAQ  had on average announced far higher  pro forma  earnings than those which they subsequently reported to the Securities and Exchange Commission following US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.##NewPara##In the euro area, the recent economic data had been weak, but forward-looking indicators were somewhat stronger. No estimate for euro-area GDP in  Q was yet available. German GDP had fallen in both  Q and Q, having been unchanged in  Q, and French GDP had also fallen in Q. However, the German IFO index had risen in February, its fourth consecutive increase; and the euro-area purchasing managers  indices had also risen in February for both manufacturing and services. Euro-area consumer confidence had risen from   to   in February, the highest level since last September.##NewPara##The economic data for Japan were discouraging. GDP had fallen in the second and third quarters of last year, and consumption continued to be weak. It was not clear what effects the government s recently-announced package to combat deflation would have. However, equity prices had increased over the past month by much more in Japan than in other major markets: the Nikkei index had risen by % in the week before the MPC meeting and by % since the previous meeting, while in the United States the S&P  and the Wilshire indices were up around % on the month, and the FTSE All-Share was up only some  % in the same period. Japanese corporations were likely to have benefited from the evidence of recovery in the United States and in other Asian countries, and it was likely that the recent weakness of the yen had supported the profitability of Japanese companies. But it was also possible that the performance of Japanese equities had been influenced, at least temporarily, by the imminent end of the financial year, for which date accounts would be reported on the basis of marked-to-market value, and reinforced by the new limitations on short-selling, so it would be difficult to interpret the rise in equity prices for at least another month.##NewPara##Strong economic data in some other Asian countries were consistent with the view that the worldwide information and communications technology sector (ICT) was beginning to turn round. Industrial production in January in both Korea and Taiwan had been over % higher than a year before, and exports were growing. Some of the Latin American economies were also picking up.##NewPara##Overall, therefore, the recovery in the global economy appeared to be occurring earlier, and to be faster and more broadly-based, than envisaged the previous month.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##Short-term UK market interest rates had risen, by some  to  basis points at a one-year maturity, since the Committee s previous meeting. The latest Reuters  survey of economists indicated a virtually unanimous expectation that there would be no change in rates this month.##NewPara##Sterling s effective exchange rate had fallen by .%. There had been a rise of .% against the dollar, and falls of .% against the euro and .% against the yen.##NewPara##The Consensus survey of longer-term expectations for sterling published in February had shown a rise of over % in the effective rate expected for  compared with the survey published last October. In consequence, the market now expected only a modest fall in the effective exchange rate over the next five years. The Committee considered why survey respondents had taken the view that the current value of sterling might be broadly sustainable. First, it was possible that the market had finally come to the view that sterling would continue to be strong given that it had been around the current level for over five years. However, it was not clear why expectations had shifted so markedly over the past four months. Second, it was possible that market participants now considered it less likely that if sterling were to enter EMU then it would be at a lower rate against the euro. However, since speculation about EMU entry had in the past often been associated with temporary sterling weakness, it was not clear what could have prompted such a change in view. Third, and supported by some anecdotal evidence, market participants might be giving weight to the fact that the bilateral current account deficit of the United Kingdom vis-a-vis the euro-area countries had not widened since , as might have been expected if sterling had become substantially overvalued against the euro. However, Eurostat data had suggested that the UK current account deficit with##NewPara##euro-area countries had in fact widened over this period, although it was notable that there was a similar discrepancy between the national and Eurostat data for Germany and France. The Committee also considered other evidence relevant to the level of sterling. In particular, the rate of return on capital in manufacturing had fallen substantially in recent years, although this may have been less true in relation to the rate of return in tradable services. While the fall in manufacturing profitability may have resulted from factors additional to sterling s appreciation, it was hard to think##NewPara##that it was unrelated to it.##NewPara##The annual growth rate of broad money had eased from around % in November to % in January. However, this was accounted for by the recent decline in deposits held by non-bank financial corporations. These deposits were volatile and often difficult to explain. Excluding this component, broad money had continued to grow at an annual rate of around %.##NewPara##Non-financial corporations had increased their holdings of deposits significantly in recent months, and the annual growth rate of this component had increased from less than % in the third quarter to over % in January. The rise was broadly based across the main subsectors.  It was possible that this had reflected corporate decisions to defer investment in  Q, perhaps reflecting increased uncertainty following the events of  September. Lending to manufacturers by the major British banking groups had risen in January and the annual growth rate, although still negative, had risen.##NewPara##Household deposit growth was unchanged in January at just under %. Total household borrowing growth had increased again, and the annual rate was now over %; both secured and unsecured borrowing growth had continued to rise. The Committee considered the significance of these high rates of growth. The velocity of M had been on a declining trend for over twenty years, so it was to be expected that deposit growth would exceed nominal GDP growth. Mortgage equity withdrawal had been exceptionally strong in the second half of , although not all of the proceeds would necessarily be spent immediately. Despite the strong growth in household deposits and borrowing over the past year, the saving ratio had not changed much.##NewPara##The housing market remained strong. Both the Halifax and the Nationwide house price indices had increased by around % in the year to February, and the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors  survey for January had shown a large increase in the net balance of estate agents reporting house price rises in the last three months.##NewTopic##Demand and Output##NewPara##Although the ONS estimate for GDP growth in  Q had been revised down to .%, this was only slightly below the projection included in the February Inflation Report, and it was possible##NewPara##that the estimate might later be revised upwards, given, in particular, more recent data on construction activity.##NewPara##Revisions to the components of expenditure suggested that investment had been weaker than previously estimated in  Q, while consumption had been much stronger, rising by .% over the third quarter against a previous estimate of .%.##NewPara##Although household borrowing and house prices had continued to rise, which might be expected to support consumption, the latest information was mixed. The volume of retail sales was estimated to have fallen by .% in January and by .% in December. However, these movements were small relative to the size of the statistical seasonal adjustment in both months, so data for at least another month would be required to confirm the trend. The CBI Distributive Trades survey had shown falls in January and February from a very strong December level. It was possible that the unexpected strength of consumer demand before Christmas had meant that the stock of goods remaining to be sold at a discount in January had been lower than usual. This would also be consistent with prices for some consumer goods in January having been discounted less than a year ago.  Private car sales had grown robustly taking January and February data together.  Looking ahead, consumer confidence surveys remained buoyant. One interpretation of the continuing unexpected strength of consumption in  Q was that the effect of interest rate reductions in reducing households  interest payments and facilitating further borrowing had been underestimated. It was possible that some consumers believed that they could afford to devote a given proportion of their income to debt servicing, so that lower interest rates had encouraged them to increase their borrowing, and that this adjustment was still in progress. In that case, any slowdown in consumption in response to a decline in the growth of disposable income might only be gradual while interest rates remained low.##NewPara##Prospects for business activity and investment had improved in the latest month. The CIPS PMI survey for manufacturing was over  for the first time in a year, and expectations for output, new orders and export orders were all up. The balance of respondents in the CBI manufacturing survey expecting output to rise in the next three months had risen from   in December to + in January. The Bank s regional Agents had reported a widespread intention among non-manufacturing contacts to increase investment in , though manufacturers were expected to reduce investment on average.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##There had been continued divergence between employment, which on the Labour Force Survey measure had risen by .% in the three months to December, and average hours worked, which had fallen by .% in the same period. Overtime hours had fallen. The central projection in the February Inflation Report had envisaged a rise in unemployment with average hours little changed, and it was possible that recent outturns, which combined lower hours with lower unemployment, would be more supportive of consumption than had been assumed in the central projection.##NewPara##Average annual earnings growth had fallen sharply, to .% in the three months to December, compared with .% in the three months to November. The slowdown was almost entirely accounted for by lower bonuses, and was broadly in line with the Committee s expectations. Weak bonus growth during the period when most bonuses were paid was likely to help slow consumption growth and hence reduce inflationary pressure. Growth in regular pay had fallen slightly, to  %, partly reflecting lower overtime payments. There was some evidence that settlements had also moderated slightly in recent months. This easing in pay pressures was perhaps surprising given a rise in the reported willingness of some groups of workers to take industrial action, but the numbers of days lost through strikes remained very low and concentrated in a few industries, mainly those which had previously been publicly owned.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Oil prices had risen by some $ per barrel since the previous meeting. The increase partly reflected market speculation that Russia would cut its output in Q, and also tension regarding Iraq. Other commodity price indices had risen slightly on the month, which would be consistent with some recovery in global economic prospects, but commodity prices remained much lower than a year ago. Global inflationary pressures had in general remained benign, although retail prices had jumped in Europe reflecting a rise in seasonal food prices.##NewPara##The annual rate of RPIX inflation had risen from .% to .% in January, the largest rise in one month for over ten years. The Committee s discussion focused on the implications of this rise for the medium-term prospects for inflation. About half of the rise had been expected, reflecting a rise in petrol prices on the same month a year ago and higher utilities prices. The additional,##NewPara##unexpected increase reflected several factors: higher seasonal food prices associated in particular with bad weather in Europe;  clothing and footwear, where there had been less aggressive discounting in the January sales than in ; leisure services, where there had been a sharp rise in annual subscription charges for various television services;  and housing depreciation.  The rise in TV charges was likely to be locked in for the year, but the other influences were expected largely to unwind over the next few months so that the upward revision to the Bank s inflation projections resulting from these RPIX data would be relatively small. There had, however, been rises in some other measures of UK inflation: housing-adjusted retail prices (HARP), a measure of retail prices adjusted to reflect the Bank s estimate of the user cost of housing, and tax and housing-adjusted retail prices (THARP), which excludes indirect taxes from the HARP index, were both rising strongly.##NewPara##Various measures of domestically generated inflation had all recorded annual rates of over % since mid-. But the household consumption deflator was rising at an annual rate of less than %, and producer input price inflation was negative. Moreover, several survey indicators of price pressures were still relatively benign.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee agreed that prospects for world activity had improved over the past month.  The recovery appeared to be coming earlier and more rapidly, and to be more broadly-based among countries and sectors, than previously expected, although with the United States still in the lead.  Data for US GDP in  Q had been revised up, business surveys were stronger, and there was evidence that the overhang of capacity which had been central to the slowdown in growth last year was less likely to inhibit investment going forward. The downside risks for activity in  had therefore diminished, although longer-term uncertainties remained as a result of the persistent economic imbalances. In the euro area the backward-looking economic data were still weak, but a wide range of forward-looking survey evidence was more encouraging, while the signs of recovery in Asia suggested that the ICT sector, which had been a major source of the shock to the world economy, was turning up. But it was not clear how robust the prospects for the United States would be over a slightly longer horizon, and there was still a risk that the euro area and more particularly Japan would not contribute substantially to the recovery. For some members of the Committee, who had previously envisaged greater downside risks to the world economy than assumed in the February Inflation Report fancharts, the improvement in prospects was significant: it appeared that the US pick-up was based on more than an end to destocking, and the possible risk to equity markets from##NewPara##possible future changes in accounting practices had not crystallised as yet.##NewPara##The balance of evidence also suggested stronger economic prospects in the UK. While GDP growth had been revised down in  Q, the revisions to data on the mix of activity suggested greater strength in consumption and house prices continued to grow rapidly. But there were also downside risks to the outlook for consumption. Two consecutive monthly falls in retail sales might suggest some easing in the pace of growth, although some components of consumption outside retail sales, such as sales of cars, had remained robust. The level of household indebtedness implied the possibility of a sharper adjustment to consumption at some stage. In contrast, while the level of investment in  Q had been lower than previously believed, survey evidence, reinforced by reports from the Bank s regional Agents and a turnround in the rate of decline in production of investment goods, pointed to stronger investment growth going forward. Members agreed that many of the factors contributing to the unexpectedly sharp increase in RPIX inflation in January were likely to prove temporary, so that the lasting effect on the outlook for inflation was only modest. There were some other upward influences on inflation: the price of oil had risen, and measures of domestically generated inflation were running at over %. Moreover, if there were more inflationary pressure in the world economy, that could imply an upward influence on UK inflation, though global excess capacity probably implied that these pressures would be subdued for some time. Earnings growth remained moderate, and input prices were also benign.##NewPara##Overall, the balance of evidence on the month pointed to somewhat stronger prospects for UK activity, and it was likely that this would imply a higher path for inflation than had been envisaged in February. However, it was too early to be sure how large and persistent the change in prospects would be and inflation was likely to be marginally below the target of  % for some time. It was therefore appropriate to wait for further evidence to assess the change to inflationary prospects. The Committee was clear that interest rates should not be changed this month. But it would be important to monitor closely how the outlook for inflation evolved month to month, and the Committee stood ready to adjust interest rates in either direction as necessary.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.