Demand and output##NewPara##The first estimate of the quarter-on-quarter rate of GDP growth in Q had been .%, considerably higher than expected at the time of the May Inflation Report. The increase in measured growth between Q and Q partly reflected a bounce back in energy production, which had been affected by the weather in Q. But it was not solely an energy story. Services output was estimated to have grown by % in Q on Q, compared with .% in Q on  Q. Another contributory factor might have been a rebound in IT spending, following a post-millennium pause in Q.##NewPara##More important than the recent volatility in the quarterly output numbers was the changing prospect for the balance of demand in the economy. For the past few years one of the central elements of the Committee s analysis had been the need to restrain final domestic demand growth, and so domestic inflationary pressures, before the downward influences on net external demand and inflation from sterling s prolonged appreciation and the weakness in world commodity prices and traded goods prices wore off. Two developments had affected that analysis in recent months: the depreciation in sterling since May and the public expenditure increases announced in the Budget and confirmed in the recent Spending Review. A key question now was, therefore, whether private sector demand would decelerate sufficiently.##NewPara##There had not been much change in aggregate public sector spending plans since the March Budget. The Chancellor s announcement since the Committee s previous meeting of the results of the Spending Review had, for the Committee s purposes, not substantially altered the overall picture, but it had added##NewPara##detail on two things: a carry forward of  . billion of underspend from -, and an increase in planned departmental spending on account of lower expected debt interest and social security payments. It was also noted that government revenue was coming in higher than projected, though views differed on the extent to which this would depress aggregate demand.##NewPara##The Committee noted the considerable uncertainty about the possibility of future underspends. Much of the planned extra spending was earmarked for government investment programmes, many of which were subject to complex planning processes. More generally, it would be unclear for some years how the timing of departmental spending would be affected by the introduction of greater flexibility in carrying forward the unspent part of departmental budgets into subsequent financial years. Some members of the Committee saw a risk of government spending being lower than planned over the forecast horizon.##NewPara##Separately, it was not clear whether the reduction in projected social security payments reflected the cyclical strength of the economy or lower social security payments for any given level of output. Whether cyclical or structural influences were at work would have some effect on the prospect for government spending if the economy slowed.##NewPara##More generally, given that the economy was currently   and was set to continue   operating close to capacity, an increase in public sector spending could be accommodated only if resources were released by a slowdown in private sector demand. A vital question, therefore, was whether that should be expected to occur autonomously at the current level of interest rates or whether a further tightening of policy might be needed to bring it about.##NewPara##This would depend in good part on the outlook for private sector consumption. The indicators were mixed. On the one hand, some encouragement could be taken from developments in the determinants and indicators of household spending. House prices had decelerated faster than earlier expected, and the latest Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors  survey showed a majority of estate agents expecting prices to fall. Domestic equity prices were hardly changed over the year so far. Wealth was, therefore, no longer rising at a rapid rate. Earnings growth had slowed and was expected to moderate further. The Bank s regional Agents reported that consumer demand seemed to be easing. On the other hand, the##NewPara##level of wealth was still high; household borrowing   secured and unsecured   remained strong; real incomes were expected to continue rising, and unemployment to remain low. It was also noted that a more moderate pace of house price growth need not of itself entail slower consumption growth, as -  showed. Overall, the Committee concluded that the saving ratio was likely to rise somewhat, reflecting both lagged effects from the past policy tightenings and also the assumption that households would want to strengthen their balance sheets. Consumption growth was, therefore, expected to moderate   only slightly compared with the first half of the year, but significantly compared to the past few years. Some members saw upside risks to the consumption profile.##NewPara##Regarding other components of private sector demand, there was some discussion of the implications for private sector investment of the recent corporate sector profit numbers. Some members##NewPara##were struck by the fall in profits in    to the lowest share of GDP for five years. Others thought that there had been only relatively small variations in a strikingly flat series.##NewPara##Survey indicators provided what was generally seen as a mixed picture of the outlook. The July CBI Quarterly Industrial Trends Survey had recorded a fall in all activity balances, other than for expected output. Some members placed considerable weight on this survey series, suggesting that despite its focus on the manufacturing sector it had the longest and best leading indicator record for whole economy output   with its most prominent  mistake  being the sharp falls in autumn , where it was possible that the Committee s rapid easing of policy had made a difference.##NewPara##The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply s manufacturing survey showed a rebound in manufacturing activity, with the balances for output, orders and export orders all rising. The British Chamber of Commerce manufacturing indicators had not risen overall, however.Some members noted that the fact that not all the manufacturing survey indicators had risen, despite the recent fall in sterling s exchange rate, suggested that there was significant underlying weakness in that sector.##NewPara##In the services sector, the main survey indicators had been stronger on the month and were pointing to continued robust growth. Given that services account for about two thirds of UK output, most members thought that the survey evidence overall was consistent with steady growth.##NewTopic##International economic developments##NewPara##The Committee briefly discussed international developments. The euro area continued to strengthen. Growth in the US had, yet again, been stronger than expected. There were, though, some signs of moderation, partly reflecting tighter monetary policy and equity prices being slightly down on the year. There remained a risk of persistent strong growth being followed by a  hard landing , possibly triggered by or leading to a sharp adjustment in asset prices.##NewPara##Oil prices had been stronger than expected in May, which had fed into petrol prices and more generally into RPIX inflation. They had though fallen back in recent weeks and were now expected to fall at a quicker pace than assumed in the May Inflation Report projections.##NewPara##Overall, the stronger world economic outlook and sterling s depreciation implied that, looking forward, external influences would probably bear down less on RPIX inflation than in recent years.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##A number of indicators suggested that the housing market was slowing: for example, net reservations, site visits, and house prices. But mortgage lending growth and approvals remained strong, as did unsecured borrowing. It was possible that higher debt levels reflected the increases over recent years in household sector wealth brought about by rises in equity and house prices. It was suggested that strong borrowing might reflect more competitive conditions in the consumer credit industry, and that the implications for demand and inflation were unclear. On the whole, though, it was thought that some deceleration in household borrowing would probably occur if consumption growth was to slow in line with the Committee s projections.The two might come together if households tried to improve their balance sheets. The timing was, however, uncertain. The possibility of continued strong borrowing represented an upside risk to consumption.##NewPara##The corporate borrowing and money numbers were a puzzle. Borrowing from banks and the capital markets was strong, but so was deposit growth. There were no clear sectoral stories to explain##NewPara##the aggregate data. Recent strength in services sector borrowing was not obviously associated with investment growth.##NewPara##While sterling s effective exchange rate index had risen by around % over the month, it was still about % below the path assumed in the Committee s May projections. Looking over the year as a whole, sterling had fallen back from its sharp spike in the spring to around the levels prevailing at the end of . Taking that longer view, it was not entirely a euro story; sterling was around  cents lower against the dollar than at the beginning of the year.##NewPara##The recent movements did seem, however, to be attributable once again to euro weakness. This was not obviously explained by relative interest rate expectations. It was conjectured that net capital inflows into the euro area were weak, or negative, on account of the substantial accumulation of capital (and associated rise in capital relative to labour) over the past fifteen years or so in continental Europe. Some members thought that, at least in the short term, there was a risk that the euro would be weaker than had been assumed in the central projection.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Employment, on the Labour Force Survey (LFS) measure, had risen by .% in the three months to May compared with the previous three months   the largest increase since June . LFS unemployment had fallen by , over the same period, to .%.  Claimant count unemployment was, at .%, the lowest for nearly  years.##NewPara##Over the past couple of years, employment had risen by well over half a million. Around half of this was accounted for by population growth. Of the remainder, falls in inactivity accounted for more than falls in unemployment.It was not clear whether that could continue, but some members were concerned that the latest projections agreed by the Committee did not allow for further falls in inactivity.##NewPara##Another source of labour supply over the past few years had probably been immigration. For example, there were anecdotal reports of public sector health workers being hired from overseas. That might continue, in which case pressures on the labour market from an expanding public sector might be##NewPara##contained. This was, however, difficult to assess quantitatively. The most up-to-date data suggested that net immigration had reached around , in    but the reliability of the data was uncertain. It was suggested that the  census might cast light on this issue in due course.##NewPara##Average hours worked by full-time employees had fallen steadily over the past - years. This was odd during a period of buoyant economic growth and a tight labour market. One possible explanation was that there had been an increase in the use of temporary agency workers in place of overtime working by full-time employees. It was suggested that that might add to labour market flexibility for the economy as a whole, as well as keeping labour costs down for some firms.##NewPara##Headline (three-month moving average) whole economy earnings growth had fallen from .% in April to .% in May, partly on account of February s .% annual growth rate dropping out of the three-month calculations. But that was not the whole explanation. Annual whole-economy earnings growth had fallen from .% in April to .% in May   the lowest rate of growth since September . The contribution from bonuses in May had been -. percentage points; regular pay growth had risen . percentage points to .% (non seasonally adjusted).##NewPara##Some members regarded the labour market news on the month as significant.  First, the continued rise in employment and fall in unemployment over the past year or so had not been accompanied by accelerating earnings, which suggested that the supply side had improved. Government initiatives during the s might help to explain this. For example, anecdote suggested that Jobcentres had become more active and effective in assisting job search. Second, the fall in bonuses was consistent with what was known about corporate sector profitability. It was suggested that bonuses might continue to fall.##NewPara##Other members were less sure about the significance of the recent data. There had undoubtedly been millennium and bonus-related effects, which were now dropping out of the data, but the underlying position was not yet clear.Looking forward, most members thought that unit labour cost growth would have to fall significantly for inflationary pressures to be contained.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##The consequences for inflation of wage cost growth depended in part on productivity. In the longer run, real wages and productivity should grow at the same rate. Over recent years, real wages had risen much faster, although the gap had recently started to narrow.##NewPara##Accumulating cost pressures were apparent in a number of indicators. For example, manufacturers  input prices (excluding food, beverages, tobacco and petroleum) had risen by .% in the twelve months to June   the fastest rate since October . A major influence on costs was the rise in the oil price, but in addition the Bank s non-oil commodity price index was up .% in the twelve months to June   the highest rate since December .RPIX inflation had risen more than had been expected, so that it was set to be much closer to target in the short run than projected in the May Inflation Report. Views varied on the significance of this.##NewPara##Some members stressed that oil prices were expected to fall back, so that the effect of the earlier price rises on RPIX inflation should be short-lived. Sterling s depreciation would also have only temporary effects. RPIX inflation excluding food, energy and tobacco had been edging down. Moreover, it was not at all clear that rising costs would feed through to prices given current and prospective developments on the supply side of the economy. These members argued that survey evidence pointed to increasing pressure on margins over the past few years. Businesses should be expected to respond to increased competitive pressure by increasing productivity and reducing bonuses. In any case, it was plausible that productivity growth was set to rise because of a variety of factors involving the potential benefits of business-to-business e-commerce and the likelihood that those who had recently obtained jobs after a long spell of unemployment or inactivity would become more effective as they gained experience. These influences were, on this view, not well reflected in the structure of the main forecasting model. In order to capture such supply side improvements in the projection for inflation, these members favoured incorporating a materially larger downward effect on inflation from the gains in productivity and cost cutting than assumed in the best collective projection shown in the fan charts.##NewPara##Some other members preferred a smaller effect than was incorporated in the best collective projection. There was not much sign of the strength in business investment that would plausibly be needed to deliver an improvement in productivity growth relative to the past trend. Nor was there much evidence of price-cost margins being systematically compressed. Experience in the US did not suggest that margin compression was an inevitable part of the ICT revolution. An assumption of price-cost margin compression had already been made in the past few forecasts and incorporated again in the August projections. It could not sensibly be rolled forward indefinitely.##NewTopic##The August output growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee agreed the projections to be published in the Inflation Report on Wednesday  August.##NewPara##On the assumption of an official repo rate of .% over the next two years, the central projection was for output growth to ease slightly to around  % (around trend) before rising slightly during the second year. On the central projection, RPIX inflation was just below the  % target during the first year and then rose to slightly above the target   a slightly higher profile than in May.##NewPara##As in previous quarters, there was a range of views about the inflation outlook. The main difference in assumptions about, in particular, price-cost margins and productivity growth were presented in Table .B of the August Inflation Report.##NewTopic##Tactical considerations##NewPara##Three tactical considerations were noted. First, the market was expecting rates to rise again but not yet. Market views of the outcome of the meeting were not uniform, but were thought to be / weighted to  no change , but with the probability assigned to a policy tightening having increased somewhat as the meeting approached. In consequence, a tightening would come as less of a surprise than would have been the case at either of the previous two meetings. That suggested that any consequent upward pressure on sterling might be limited. However, tightening sooner than the market##NewPara##expected might lead to the view that rates would eventually go up by more than currently expected. That might increase any upward pressure on sterling, adding to the downward influences on inflation.##NewPara##Second, the Inflation Report would provide an opportunity to explain any change in the repo rate.##NewPara##Third, the Committee s meeting was to be followed fairly shortly by meetings of the ECB, the Bank of Japan and the FOMC. Their decisions would also affect the exchange rate and the external environment more generally. The market was not expecting rises from either the ECB or FOMC.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Various arguments were advanced in favour of maintaining the repo rate at .%. For some preferring  no change  the position was finely balanced. On the one hand, the signs that the economy was slowing were less compelling following the first estimate of Q GDP, the world economy remained strong, and there would be upward pressures on inflation from sterling s depreciation since May. On the other hand, the determinants of consumption were consistent with slowing private sector demand, and the outlook for earnings was more benign than at the time of the May Inflation Report. Moreover, there did seem to have been some improvement in the economy s supply-side performance. Among other evidence, some members cited the tendency over the past few years for the Committee to underpredict output growth but overpredict inflation outturns, although lower import prices had played a part. Some allowance was made for this in the margins assumptions in the latest projections. The best collective projection   with inflation slightly below target in the first year and slightly above in the second year   reflected this balance of forces and was consistent with either  no change  or a small policy tightening. An immediate move was not needed, and would risk the market concluding that there would be further tightenings, which through upward pressure on sterling would create unnecessary downward pressures on inflation. Publishing a fan chart with the central projection slightly above target at the two-year horizon might cause a modest tightening in money market conditions. That would not be unwelcome in itself and would avoid the risk of a larger market adjustment if the repo rate were raised.##NewPara##Some other members preferred assumptions which would produce a lower central projection for inflation. In particular, improvements in the performance of the supply side of the economy would##NewPara##dampen inflationary pressures by more than assumed in the best collective projection. Looking forward, those pressures were in any case easing rather than increasing. The earnings data in particular were encouraging, and the oil price had recently fallen back somewhat. The deceleration in house prices and the likelihood that the oil price would not rise further would be negative influences on RPIX inflation for a while. The determinants of consumption were softening. While the risks to consumption were probably on the upside, the risks to business investment and government spending were on the downside. On one view policy was already contractionary: this could be seen in various leading indicators, in estimates showing that the short-term real interest rate was above the  neutral  rate, and from a tightening in measures of monetary conditions that incorporated the rise in the exchange rate in recent years. Whereas a month ago there had been a case for moving to a more  neutral  policy stance, the latest data pointed to a need to maintain slightly contractionary monetary conditions. But there was no case for a further rise. Any tightening would also put upward pressure on sterling s exchange rate.##NewPara##That was unnecessary in terms of restraining inflation, and it would also add to the risk of sterling s already-overvalued exchange rate falling sharply in the future   thus creating a risk of undershooting the target in the short run but overshooting it later on if and when sterling fell back.##NewPara##Arguments were also advanced in favour of an immediate small increase in the repo rate. On this view, the news on the month pointed, on balance, to stronger conditions than had been apparent a month ago. If the GDP data for Q and Q were averaged, there was little sign of a significant slowdown. While most of the determinants of consumption had eased in recent months, household borrowing remained strong and it was not yet clear that private sector demand would slow quickly enough to offset the effects of increased public sector spending; the risks to inflation from consumption were on the upside. Measures of earnings growth had fallen, but it was very difficult to assess the underlying rate of increase. It was clear, though, that the labour market had continued to tighten. Employment had increased by  % in the three months to May, and unemployment was lower than for a quarter of a century. The central projection assumed decelerating unit labour costs. The risks to inflation from earnings were therefore also on the upside. Other indicators of short-term cost pressures were clearly increasing, and inflation was now likely to undershoot the  % target in the short run by rather less than had been projected in the May Inflation Report. While sterling had risen since the Committee s July meeting, it was still about % below the path projected in the May Inflation Report; and there remained a risk of further falls since the economy was still relatively uncompetitive at the##NewPara##current real exchange rate. It was conceivable that a structural shift in economy-wide margins was underway, but there was not much evidence of this yet; for this reason some members preferred a higher central projection for inflation than the best collective projection. While there were tactical arguments in favour of delay, given that the balance of risks to inflation was on the upside, and given that the market was expecting a modest tightening later in the year, the better course was an immediate increase of  basis points. For some this was a finely balanced decision.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be maintained at .%. Five members of the Committee (the Governor, Christopher Allsopp, DeAnne Julius, Ian Plenderleith and Sushil Wadhwani) voted for the proposition. David Clementi, Mervyn King, Stephen Nickell and John Vickers voted against, preferring a rise in rates of  basis points.