Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##Sterling s effective exchange rate index (ERI) had been volatile, moving in a range of . to##NewPara##. in the  days up to the meeting. It had risen by about three quarters of a percentage point since the Committee s January meeting, and the -day average used as the starting point in the February Inflation Report projections was about four percentage points higher than that used in the November projections. This rise in the ERI was accounted for by an appreciation against the euro which could not be explained by changes in interest rate differentials.##NewPara##The Committee discussed whether sterling s strength might be explained by a rise in the medium-to-long run equilibrium real exchange rate against the euro. There might have been such a rise if, for example, UK production had become more competitive relative to the euro area, perhaps on account of greater market flexibility and/or more widespread application of new technologies. But, at least as yet, there was no sign of this from the performance of the trade equations in the medium-term macroeconomic model, and it was difficult to identify news over the past few months suggesting that the long-run equilibrium exchange rate had changed.##NewPara##Another possibility was that there had been a change in the risk premium, with sterling regarded as having become less risky relative to the euro. The change to the UK s monetary framework and/or, for example, uncertainty about structural reform in parts of continental Europe could, in principle, have brought that about. It was, however, highly uncertain whether this was a material part of the explanation of sterling s recent rise.##NewPara##If sterling had risen on account of a change in the risk premium, what would that imply for the path of the exchange rate looking forward? A number of possibilities were identified. First, a reduction##NewPara##in the perceived risk in holding sterling relative to other currencies would mean that holders of sterling-denominated assets would require a lower relative return than otherwise, in which case the##NewPara##market would be expecting sterling to depreciate on a steeper path than otherwise for any given path of interest rate differentials. Second, while a shift in the risk premium in sterling s favour implied an expectation that sterling would depreciate by more than otherwise over the long run, it did not necessarily follow that sterling should be expected to depreciate in the shorter run, including over the forecast horizon. If, as on this view seemed likely, portfolio managers and others were gradually learning about the new UK monetary framework, perceptions of relative risk and credibility would change gradually. In that case, the risk premium might continue to adjust for a while, with holders of sterling earning supernormal returns during a transition period of uncertain length. Yet another possibility for some members was that sterling had risen because of the significant interest differential vis- -vis the euro, and the growing expectation that this difference would not decline in the near future. Some empirical evidence supported the notion that one might earn persistent, supernormal returns from currencies that offered the higher interest rate. Views differed on these possibilities.##NewPara##Committee members differed in their preferred assumptions for the path of sterling s effective exchange rate in the February Inflation Report projections. Some preferred to assume a constant nominal exchange rate; some others preferred a depreciation in line with interest rate differentials (and perhaps with the balance of risks to sterling towards a steeper depreciation). The assumption used in the best collective projections was half way between the two. Others noted that an econometric model- based projection for the exchange rate yielded a broadly similar answer.##NewPara##Turning to the monetary data, the Committee noted that the rate of increase in narrow money had fallen sharply during January so that, as earlier thought, December s very rapid growth did seem to be an end-year/end-millennium phenomenon. Nevertheless, the underlying rate of M growth appeared to be robust, pointing to strong growth in household spending in the near term. More generally, household M growth had picked up; household Divisia growth had risen between Q and Q; and total household borrowing was now rising more quickly than since the early s, with mortgage equity withdrawal increasing. Taken together, this supported the buoyant near-term outlook for consumption suggested by rising incomes, consumer confidence, and wealth.##NewPara##House price inflation had remained high. The Halifax index had risen by % in the year to January, up from around  % in December, but the significance of this rise was uncertain as the Halifax index had been volatile over the past few months. The Nationwide index, rising at about %##NewPara##year-on-year, had been more stable. There were tentative signs in the activity data that pressures in the housing market might be easing, perhaps reflecting tighter monetary conditions. The number of particulars delivered had fallen in December by about  %, and the figure for November had been revised down slightly.  The volume of transactions was basically flat.  The number of loan approvals had fallen slightly at the end of , having previously been stable since the summer. While the Committee assumed in its best collective projection that there would most probably be some moderation in house price inflation over the coming year or so, it was likely to remain quite high. This would tend to support continuing robust consumption growth, with some members seeing upside risks.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##As already noted, the underlying determinants and forward-looking indicators of consumption had strengthened. For example, consumer confidence, as measured by the GfK index, had risen by a further  points in January to +, its highest level since autumn . Although new car purchases had recently been relatively weak, it seemed probable that this reflected a pause while prospective purchasers waited for the results of the Competition Commission inquiry into the car market.##NewPara##Reports from the Bank s regional Agents suggested that the apparent weakness in business investment in the second half of  might in part be explained by firms having delayed spending with an IT component until the millennium-date change was safely out of the way. If so, any deferred expenditure would tend to support near-term investment growth, as in the view of some Committee members would the possibility of firms stepping up investment related to e-commerce. Tighter monetary conditions and the higher exchange rate would, on the other hand, tend to reduce investment spending. Overall, the Committee concluded that the most likely outlook for investment was slightly weaker than in November, but with some members seeing upside risks.##NewPara##The outlook for net trade was important to the Committee s judgment about the balance of pressures on the economy s productive capacity and, therefore, the prospects for inflation. Export growth had picked up during  with the recovery in world economic activity; Q had been unusually strong. Imports had also increased during . Since the November Report, however, the trade figures had been weaker and the outlook had changed because of the further appreciation in sterling s exchange rate. It now seemed likely that the contribution of net trade to output growth would be more negative than earlier expected. This had three consequences. First, it would help to offset the effects on GDP growth of the prospective sustained strength of final domestic demand, and so contribute to containing near-term pressures on capacity. Second, it would mean that the imbalances in##NewPara##the economy   in particular between businesses which were externally exposed and those which were not   would be likely to persist, and could even become more pronounced. Third, other things being equal, it would entail a larger current account deficit and accumulating external debt.##NewPara##In the second half of , output had grown at .% per quarter, slightly above trend. There had been some signs in the latter part of  that the sectoral split in activity was becoming somewhat more balanced. Services sector growth had fallen slightly between Q and Q, and manufacturing production as a whole had been picking up. But overall industrial production and manufacturing had fallen in December, and there remained marked differences between industrial sectors. Moreover, the effects of sterling s further appreciation, which would tend to reduce growth in externally-exposed businesses, would not yet be apparent in the activity data.##NewPara##The Committee discussed whether, or not, an accumulating current account deficit would have implications for the exchange rate. On one view, it was questionable whether it was consistent to assume both a growing external deficit and persistent sterling strength. If there had been a change in the equilibrium real exchange rate, sterling might remain high but then the trade deficit   and so the current account deficit   would be smaller than assumed. Alternatively, an accumulating external deficit would lead to a depreciation. The latter seemed, on this view, more likely: to the extent that the divergence between the growth rates of domestic demand and output persisted and widened, the greater the risk to sterling would become. On another view, there was no obvious inconsistency between the projected current account deficit and persistent sterling strength over the forecast horizon. Two reasons for this were suggested. First, in a world of highly mobile capital, there was no direct link between the current account and the exchange rate. Instead, there were links through asset markets. Second, the size of the prospective current account deficit was on this view modest, at %- % of GDP. Third, while a deficit which continued to grow would over the medium-to-long run entail a depreciation in sterling s real exchange rate, that did not imply that the real, and even less the nominal, exchange rate had to fall during the next two years or so. The UK economy could generate the required surpluses in the future without a sharp near-term nominal depreciation.##NewTopic##Labour market conditions##NewPara##Labour market conditions might have tightened slightly since the Committee s November Inflation Report. The evidence since the Committee s January meeting was mixed. While claimant count unemployment had fallen by around , in December, taking the rate down . percentage point to .%, the broader-based LFS measure had increased by around , in the three months from##NewPara##September to November compared with the previous three months. The LFS measure of employment had risen slightly over the same period, with part-time employment falling and full-time employment rising. Total hours worked had fallen slightly. Survey-based indicators of recruitment intentions remained strong in the services sector and had picked up in manufacturing. The British Chamber of Commerce indicator of recruitment difficulties had been stable, although the Bank s regional Agents were reporting increased skill shortages compared with the previous quarter.##NewPara##On recent developments on pay, some members drew encouragement from public sector settlements, on the grounds that they could have a useful demonstration effect. But there was also concern that the earnings data would be difficult to interpret over the coming months given that financial sector and millennium-related bonuses were expected to be strong.##NewPara##The earnings and settlement data continued to diverge. On the Average Earnings Index (AEI) measure, earnings had grown at an annual rate of .% in the three months to November, and had persistently been higher than had been expected at the time of the Committee s November Inflation Report. Wage drift appeared to be increasing as settlements had, on average, been running at around  % over recent months, and on most measures were lower in January than a year ago. The regional Agents  survey of the prospect for earnings growth in    summarised in the Annex   also showed a divergent picture: settlements were, on balance, expected to be weaker in , but total pay per employee was on balance expected to rise at a faster rate than in .##NewPara##It was possible that increasing wage drift was a sign of tight labour market conditions. Alternatively, the wedge between settlement and earnings growth might be accounted for by increases in profit-related   or performance-related   pay, which might more closely reflect productivity improvements. In that case it would not necessarily signal increasing pressure on prices. However, while measured productivity growth had recovered in recent quarters, it was now only broadly in line with the past long-run trend. It was difficult to know whether there had been improvements in productivity that were not reflected in the official data. Views differed on this.##NewPara##Members placed different weight on the earnings and settlement numbers. Overall, the Committee concluded that, partly reflecting the recent stronger-than-expected outturns of the AEI, the path for earnings growth would be higher than had been assumed in the November projections.##NewTopic##World economy developments##NewPara##The USA had continued to grow more strongly than earlier expected, and seemed set to continue to do so, although downside risks remained. Recent growth in the euro area had also been stronger than expected in November, and the improvement in business confidence indicators suggested a stronger outlook. Partly against this background, both the Federal Reserve and the ECB had raised interest rates since the Committee s January meeting. This tightening of global monetary conditions had been in line with what had been assumed in the Committee s November projections.##NewPara##Developments in Japan were less clear. Consumption remained very weak and output might even have fallen in the second half of , having done so in Q. But there were signs of improvement in corporate profitability, which could support investment.  That might have contributed to the rise in the Nikkei index over the past few months, although it was noted that price rises had been markedly more pronounced in some stocks than in others. The Committee noted that there were some signs of market concerns about the growth in Japanese government debt which, if fiscal policy were as a result to be constrained, would tend to place more pressure on monetary policy in the absence of a self-sustaining recovery in growth.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Probably reflecting the stronger world economic conjuncture, commodity prices had continued to rise. The annual rate of increase in the Bank s oil-inclusive index had risen to nearly % in December; excluding oil, the rate of growth was slightly over  %, the highest rate since##NewPara##Although input prices were rising strongly, intermediate prices (as measured for example by producer output prices) were increasing more moderately, and RPIX inflation had remained below the  % target.##NewPara##The counterpart to the rapid recent rise in manufacturing productivity had been that the twelve month rate of change in manufacturing unit wage costs had fallen in every month between July and November, when the twelve month fall had been .%. However, there was little evidence that measured economy-wide labour productivity growth had risen above levels implied by the past long-run trend of around % per year. It was plausible that the Internet would facilitate an increase in the level of productivity that might be spread over several years.##NewPara##Given that the expected path of aggregate demand was close to estimates of the economy s productive capacity, judgments on the outlook for inflation over the forecast horizon depended to a significant degree, as in November, on views about the implications of developments in technology and in competition. The Committee concluded that, in its best collective projection, the downward adjustments should be slightly larger than in November.##NewPara##Some members preferred a smaller adjustment to price-cost margins, particularly in the second year of the projection. While there were undoubtedly major changes underway in competition and technology, the implications for inflation were not straightforward. There had been major technological changes in the real economy during the s and s   for example, in computing power   but that period had also seen the highest inflation rates in modern British history. Such developments entailed changes in relative prices, but it was unclear how large changes in some relative prices should be translated into a change in the aggregate price level. Some other members preferred larger downward adjustments to price-cost margins in both years than in the best collective assumptions. For example, the effects of the Internet and e-tailing would most likely be greater than assumed, with larger second-round effects on costs and prices. More generally, the supply side innovations did not just entail relative price changes but were characterised by a generalised intensification of product market competition and so were affecting the economy as a whole, with a compression of average margins.##NewTopic##The February output growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee agreed the projections to be published in the Inflation Report on Thursday  February.##NewPara##On the assumption of an official repo rate of .% over the next two years, the best collective projection was for output growth to rise to about % and then fall back to around  %   close to most estimates of trend   for most of the forecast period. This was softer than in November, largely reflecting the tightening of monetary policy and sterling s appreciation.##NewPara##On the best collective projection, RPIX inflation fell slightly from its current level of .% to about % during , and then rose gradually to around the  % target from mid-. There was less of a saucer shape (that is, a dip followed by a sharp upturn) than in November, reflecting upward pressures early in the forecast period from higher earnings growth than in the November projection and downward pressures later on in the forecast period from the restraining effects of tighter monetary policy and the higher exchange rate.##NewPara##As already described, there was a range of preferred assumptions for the path of the nominal exchange rate and for price-cost margins; these were presented in Table .B on page  of the February Inflation Report. Different members preferred different combinations of these assumptions, either raising or lowering the inflation projection at the two-year horizon by up to half a percentage point.##NewTopic##Other considerations: implications of the exchange rate and sectoral imbalances##NewPara##Against the background of its latest projections and its analysis of the recent data, the Committee discussed a range of issues before turning to its immediate policy decision. In particular, a number of Committee members were very concerned about the further rise in the exchange rate that had occurred over the past few months; and about the associated imbalances in the economy.##NewPara##The prospects for inflation depended heavily on the path of the exchange rate, which was highly uncertain. If sterling were to depreciate in line with interest rate differentials (or more) then, other things being equal, inflation would most likely be above the  % target by the forecast horizon. If, on the other hand, sterling s current strength persisted, inflation would most likely be below target throughout the forecast period.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the implications for monetary policy of domestic sectoral imbalances associated with the continuing strength of sterling.##NewPara##On one view, prospective sectoral imbalances should not of themselves affect the Committee s interest rate decision given its remit. Moreover, imbalances had, if anything, narrowed in recent months. The difference between recent annual rates of growth for services and manufacturing had declined. Regional differences had also narrowed, with for example the balance of new orders recorded in the January CBI Quarterly Trends survey rising in ten out of eleven regions. Moreover, a marked dispersion of growth rates amongst firms within particular sectors was to be expected in a period of technological and structural change; in that sense the imbalances between old and new industries were a symptom of factors that would otherwise be regarded as desirable.##NewPara##On another view, if the exchange rate persisted at its current level, the imbalances in the economy would probably get worse and that was unwelcome. It was already likely that there had been failures amongst businesses which would have been able to survive at a lower   and, on the view of some members, more sustainable   real exchange rate. It was noted that one recent IMF study had estimated that sterling was overvalued by more than %, a bigger misalignment than the study##NewPara##estimated for any other industrialised country. It was, therefore, desirable to consider whether official policy could do anything to mitigate this. It was noted in that context that the textbook response would be fiscal policy tightening. But that kind of active use of fiscal policy was forsworn under the current fiscal framework, and it was observed that fiscal policy had in fact tightened over the past few years.##NewPara##As to monetary policy, whether the Committee s remit was in principle consistent with taking these concerns into account depended on whether there were different paths of interest rates which could achieve the inflation target but which might have different implications for the exchange rate. It was noted that an interest rate policy which helped to sustain sterling at current or higher levels ran significant risks with the inflation target at some future point when sterling could fall sharply. In the interests of making it easier to meet the inflation target at all times, an interest rate path now that helped to keep sterling lower would be desirable. On the other hand, an interest rate policy which sought to offset the current strength of sterling would risk fuelling domestic demand, which could have adverse implications for inflation further ahead.##NewPara##It was in any event unclear what, if anything, the Committee could do to address these wider concerns given the current conjuncture of market expectations.  The market was firmly expecting a  basis point rise in the Bank s repo rate. Some members believed that if that were the Committee s##NewPara##decision, there would be little change in either the exchange rate or in money market rates. Some other members were concerned that a tightening of policy, even though expected, could have the effect of putting further upward pressure on sterling when the Inflation Report was released, by making it appear a  one way bet  in the short run.##NewPara##There was also a range of views on the likely market reaction to a decision to maintain the repo rate at .%. Some members thought that, particularly given the Inflation Report projection, it was likely that the market would conclude that a rate rise had simply been deferred, and possibly even that the official rate would end up having to go higher than otherwise. In that case, sterling s exchange rate would be supported and might even rise rather than falling back. Some other members thought that it might be possible to explain a  no change  decision in a way which avoided that risk and which might create conditions in which sterling eased back. RPIX inflation had been below the  % target for nine months and, on current evidence, was set to remain so over the coming year. This profile might make a  wait and see  policy feasible and could potentially provide a safe background against which to explain publicly that inflation would undershoot the target if both sterling and interest rates remained at their current levels. That might help to dent any  one way bet  element in sterling s short-run strength. In addition, these members doubted that sterling would rise sustainably on a  no change  decision, because##NewPara##if it were to do so, the markets would quickly conclude that, other things being equal, a future interest rate rise had become less likely, which would weaken an important source of support for sterling.##NewPara##The Committee debated whether intervention in the foreign exchange markets could usefully be deployed, either with the announcement of the Committee s immediate repo rate decision or subsequently. Those members prepared to contemplate intervention placed some weight on its use as a signal of concerns about the level of the exchange rate   a more powerful signal than words alone   but most of them concluded that it could be an option only if the Committee decided to leave the repo rate unchanged and, even then, would have to depend on market conditions. Other members thought, first, that it was doubtful whether intervention would be effective as there was little evidence that the market consensus which sustained sterling at its current level was fragile; and that a failed attempt to influence the exchange rate via intervention would damage the Committee s credibility. Second, to the extent that sterling s strength mainly reflected euro weakness, the MPC could do very little about it. Third, the Committee s analysis of the exchange rate could be conveyed via the minutes of the meeting and did not need to be demonstrated via intervention.##NewPara##While views differed on the range of options feasibly available to the Committee, there was broader agreement that, subject to the over-riding objective of achieving the inflation target, it would be preferable to have a lower exchange rate and higher interest rates from the point of view of economic conditions and balance more generally.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Some members of the Committee preferred forecast assumptions   about the path of the exchange rate and about price-cost margins   which would produce a central projection for inflation at the two-year forecast horizon closer to % than  %. In the short run, inflation would continue to be below target and would be further restrained by the appreciation in sterling, which would more than offset the increase in oil prices. But it was vital to be forward-looking. Given the medium-term outlook, policy needed to be tighter, and in particular domestic demand growth needed to be reined back. The choice was, therefore, for an immediate increase in the repo rate of  basis points or##NewPara## basis points. Another view accepted the best collective judgment of the central projection, but regarded the balance of risks to inflation as clearly on the upside, on account of the possibility of a faster depreciation in the exchange rate and stronger domestic demand growth than assumed in the central projection. On this view too, the choice was between a  basis point and a  basis point increase.##NewPara##There was, however, more than one path for interest rates that would enable the Committee to achieve##NewPara##the target. Given that inflation was set to remain below target in the relatively short term, there was time to gather more evidence, in particular about the path of the exchange rate, earnings, price-cost margins, and productivity, all of which were highly uncertain but important to the inflation outlook. There was, thus, no need to take the risk that an immediate  basis point increase might put further upward pressure on sterling. An immediate rise of  basis points was the best course.##NewPara##For some other members, the immediate choice was between a  basis point increase and no change, and for them that choice was very finely balanced. On the one hand, there were risks to the inflation outlook from continued buoyant domestic demand growth and a tight labour market, which implied strong underlying domestically-generated inflation. On the other hand, inflation could remain below target for a protracted period if sterling s strength persisted, as the experience of the past few years suggested it clearly might.  While inflation would tend to be higher than expected if sterling fell by more than assumed in the best collective projection, it was arguable that there could be time to raise rates if and when that happened as inflation was otherwise set to remain below target for a further period.  Given the immediate benign outlook and the major uncertainties about the more distant prospect, this analysis suggested that either a rise of  basis points or no change would be consistent with pursuit of the inflation target and thus with the Committee s remit. However, given the Committee s inflation projection profile, in the view of some there was a risk that leaving rates unchanged would have the perverse effect of putting further upwards pressure on sterling, by leaving the market with the expectation that tighter policy had simply been deferred; and in the view of others, that sterling could not fall much on a no-change decision without engendering expectations of further interest rate rises. Although sterling was substantially overvalued against the euro, it was not clear how monetary policy could in the short run help to produce a better balance between external and internal monetary conditions. In those circumstances, the better course was to continue to restrain domestic demand growth, which remained above trend and so posed an upside risk to the medium-term outlook for inflation unless brought back to a more sustainable rate. On a delicate balance, the better course was therefore to raise rates by  basis points. Some members taking this view thought that, subject to any new evidence about the inflation outlook, there might then be an opportunity to wait and see before making any further change, and that this would offer the best chance of achieving the inflation target while enabling sterling to return to a more realistic level.##NewPara##On another view, there was no need for a further increase in the repo rate. Internationally, the tightening of monetary policy elsewhere over the past month would help to contain any inflationary pressures from the stronger world economy. Domestically, there had been little news, and recent labour##NewPara##market data had, if anything, been encouraging. The outlook for domestic demand growth might have strengthened slightly but sterling had continued to appreciate over the month, which would restrain activity and inflation. In terms of the forecast, if sterling remained at its current level and/or the downward pressures on prices from stronger competition and new technology were greater than in the best collective assumption, then inflation would continue to undershoot the target for the next two years. A further increase in the repo rate would increase this undershoot and would also create a short-term risk of adding to sterling s strength.##NewPara##The Governor invited members of the Committee to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate be increased by  basis points to .%. Eight members of the Committee (the Governor,##NewPara##Mervyn King, David Clementi, Charles Goodhart, Willem Buiter, Ian Plenderleith, John Vickers and Sushil Wadhwani) voted for the proposition. DeAnne Julius voted against, preferring to maintain interest rates at .%.