The world economy##NewPara##The economic recovery in the United States was developing broadly as had been envisaged in the May Inflation Report projections. Very strong output growth in the first quarter had in large part reflected a turnaround in the stock cycle, so it was likely that activity growth would moderate in the second quarter. But that was as expected, and would be consistent with projections for steady growth further out. Several indicators suggested underlying improvement: manufacturing output had risen in April, with output in the information and communications technology sector up by %, and both the manufacturing and non-manufacturing Institute for Supply Management indices had increased by more than many observers had expected in May; consumer confidence had risen in May; and the recent tax cuts had raised personal disposable income. Prospects for investment, however, were still uncertain: business commentators appeared to be less confident of prospects than indicated in many economic forecasts and equities had weakened. There was perhaps a slight upside risk to inflation from the rise in oil prices earlier this year and the recent fall in the dollar.##NewPara##In the euro area, there had been modest output growth of .% in the first quarter. There were significant differences in performance between the major European economies, with growth in Germany and Italy weaker than had been expected but France somewhat more buoyant. For the euro area as a whole, net trade had contributed . percentage points to growth, and the external contribution to growth in Germany had been even larger, at . percentage points. That suggested that the weakness of domestic demand was the main drag on growth in the euro area. Euro-area consumption had fallen for two consecutive quarters, reflecting the impact of sluggish employment growth, higher food and oil prices, and the weakness of the euro on real personal disposable income.##NewPara##Looking forward, however, euro-area surveys of industrial and consumer confidence had risen a little in May. The annual rate of increase in the area-wide Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices had slowed from .% in April to .% on the flash estimate for May.##NewPara##Recent data for overseas trade and personal consumption suggested that GDP growth in Japan might have been strong in the first quarter, but major structural problems still faced the economy going forward.##NewPara##The dollar had fallen by over % against the euro since the Committee s May meeting, and by  % since the April meeting. The recent depreciation would ultimately help reduce international current account imbalances. But it was difficult to rationalise why it had occurred now. The Committee had previously found it difficult to explain why the dollar had appreciated so much in the late s, and why it had remained strong in  when the economic slowdown had been more pronounced in the United States than in the other major economies. The movement in the past month had been broadly consistent with interest differentials, but was less easy to reconcile with the apparent strength of domestic recovery in the United States relative to the euro area. Commentators had advanced several other possible explanations: there might have been a reappraisal of prospects for the medium-term profitability of the US corporate sector, on the view that more of the benefits from the acceleration in productivity since the mid-s would accrue to labour rather than shareholders; there might be increased uncertainty relating to corporate earnings reports, especially those of some larger companies, in the light of the Enron episode and concerns about corporate governance; and recent protectionist measures proposed by the US Administration for the steel and agricultural industries might have affected investors  confidence. It was suggested that several of these stories appeared to have originated after the event. Moreover, those factors should also have resulted in a##NewPara##weaker performance for equities in the United States than elsewhere, but it was not at all clear that that had been the case.##NewPara##The difficulty in accounting for the previous strength in the dollar made it hard to assess whether its current level would be sustained or whether the recent depreciation would continue. The depreciation had been steady, rather than following one or two specific events, which did not suggest an early reversal, and had continued despite apparently large purchases of dollars by the Bank of Japan. But options prices did not suggest a material rise in uncertainty relating to dollar bilateral rates.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##The effective exchange rate index (ERI) for sterling had also fallen, by about % since the Committee s previous meeting, and was already below the level for  Q which had been assumed in the May Inflation Report projections. The bilateral rate against the dollar was little changed, while there had been a depreciation of over % against the euro. In contrast to the dollar-euro rate, these movements seemed not to have reflected changes in interest rate differentials in the past month. The sterling-euro rate had closely followed the dollar-euro rate over that period, rather than rising against the dollar while falling against the euro. That suggested that the fall in the dollar had been an important influence on sterling, although it was not clear why the correlation with the dollar had been so close. It was also possible that increased speculation about the possibility of sterling entry into EMU, and the exchange rate at which it might do so, could have affected sterling at specific times during May.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the extent to which sterling depreciation might affect activity, import prices and retail price inflation. Recent experience in a number of countries suggested that the short- run pass-through from exchange rate changes to domestic prices had weakened in recent years. But a lower pass-through might in part have been the result of an appropriate monetary policy response to exchange rate movements. Pass-through would also depend on the extent to which an increase in net external demand could be accommodated by spare capacity in the economy. In the United Kingdom, there was still significant unused capacity in the export sectors. Export volumes had recently been weaker than expected. It was possible that this reflected the supply decisions of some exporters in the face of continued sterling strength and depressed profit margins. Any fall in sterling might need to be large and sustained to encourage such producers to renew their export supply. Finally, the stimulus to net trade from depreciation might to some extent be offset by a reduction in domestic demand if higher import prices reduced consumption. But although the size of the impact of the depreciation on activity and inflation was debatable, the direction of the effect was clear.##NewPara##Recent trends in the monetary aggregates had continued, with the household sector showing particular strength. Notes and coin in circulation had increased by over % in the year to May; households  broad money deposits had grown by over % in the year to April, while their borrowing from banks and building societies had risen by % over the same period. Growth rates of both secured and unsecured borrowing were continuing to increase. In aggregate, the household sector##NewPara##financial position had recently been close to balance as the rise in lending had been accompanied by an increase in financial assets. But the aggregate expansion of both sides of the household sector balance sheet concealed a risk at a disaggregated level: to the extent that some households were accumulating liabilities while others were increasing their assets, there was a risk that indebted households might have to adjust their balance sheets and consequently reduce their consumption sharply in the event of an adverse shock.##NewPara##Both the Halifax and the Nationwide indices had recorded house price rises of some % in the past two months. Data on housing loan approvals, on subsequent cancellations of approved loans, and on estate agents  turnover, suggested that in many regions demand for housing was very strong relative to the available supply. The present rate of increase in house prices was unsustainable, and the longer it persisted the greater would be the risk of a subsequent sharp correction. The Committee did not target house prices. But house price developments were relevant because they affected prospects for demand and inflation. The recent rises had increased the net equity of the household sector in their homes, which they could use as collateral for secured borrowing. Mortgage equity withdrawal was estimated to have risen to around  % of personal disposable income in the first quarter.##NewPara##The Committee discussed the likelihood that factors other than higher interest rates might lead house price rises to moderate. First, mortgage lenders might become concerned that borrowers would experience difficulty in servicing their debt, and consequently tighten the conditions of their lending. But arrears and defaults on mortgage lending had been relatively low, and anecdotal evidence suggested that there was keen competition among lenders in the housing market, driven by a desire to maintain market share, resulting in favourable terms for borrowers. Debt-servicing capacity would probably be seen as a problem only if there were substantial rises in either interest rates or unemployment, which banks and building societies assessed when making lending decisions. Second, there were signs that the demand to buy properties to let might ease, as potential net rental income fell below the combined cost of debt servicing and maintenance. But this was still a relatively small proportion of the market. Third, if house prices continued to rise relative to earnings, potential first- time buyers might find it difficult to enter the market.##NewPara##The Committee considered whether a sharp adjustment in house prices would by itself be relevant for monetary policy. Such a fall could result in cases of negative equity. Some independent effect of a house price fall on consumption was in any event thought likely through the reduced##NewPara##availability of collateral, and there might also be a more general impact on consumer confidence. Any such developments would affect the outlook for inflation.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##GDP output growth in the first quarter had been revised down by . percentage points to .%, contrary to expectations. It remained difficult to reconcile these data with other information about the economy for the same period. First, on the output side, the GDP data implied a lower-than-expected increase of only .% in services output. This was weaker than implied by evidence from service sector surveys; reports from the Bank s regional Agents had also suggested somewhat stronger growth in services in the first quarter. However, it was possible that the surveys gave insufficient weight to sharply weaker output by a few important companies in the financial services sector. Second, numbers employed and hours worked had increased in the first quarter. This also seemed inconsistent with zero growth in output over the same period. Third, on the expenditure side, the level of public expenditure seemed surprisingly low, and upward revisions to the estimates of both government consumption and government investment seemed likely. Fourth, the estimate of the net trade contribution to growth implied a rise in the export price deflator of .% and a similar fall in the import price deflator. This rise in export prices seemed inconsistent with survey evidence. If the estimate for this deflator were to be revised down, it could imply higher export volumes. Either higher government expenditure or higher export volumes would in turn imply a higher GDP estimate. Finally, the GDP data implied a positive contribution of .% from stockbuilding. This was stronger than suggested by evidence from surveys and reports from the Bank s regional Agents. Any downward revision to the stockbuilding contribution could in turn imply a lower GDP estimate.##NewPara##While in the Committee s judgment the balance of probability was therefore that the GDP data for the first quarter would be revised up somewhat, the latest ONS estimate had been below the figure incorporated in the May Inflation Report projections. Consequently, a moderate upward revision would have little impact on the Committee s central projection for inflation.##NewPara##Looking ahead to the second quarter, there was some evidence to suggest significant growth in activity. In manufacturing, the CBI expected output balance was still positive, although it had fallen back in May; the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply (CIPS) PMI survey for manufacturing had also eased in May but the output component had risen further. Reports from the Bank s regional##NewPara##Agents showed little evidence to date of an increase in manufacturing output, although production was no longer thought to be falling in aggregate as it had in the first quarter. But the picture for services output was stronger: the CIPS services business activity index had risen in May to its strongest level since February . Prospects for household spending in the second quarter also looked robust: vehicle registrations in April had been % higher than a year before; retail sales had risen exceptionally by .% in April, although the CBI Distributive Trades survey signalled some easing in May; and the GfK index of consumer confidence had risen in May. This pattern of strength was consistent with the Bank s regional Agents  reports and the household borrowing data.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##The level of employment increased in the three months to March, but by considerably less than the population of working age. Despite this the LFS unemployment rate fell by . percentage points to .% over the same period and there was a substantial rise in inactivity. There had been a rise of .% in hours worked in the first quarter, reversing the falls last autumn, with both full-time and part- time hours increasing. Claimant count unemployment had risen slightly in both March and April; gross inflows to unemployment had increased, but so had the number of unemployed workers leaving the count.##NewPara##Revisions to the data had reduced the exceptionally large negative contribution of bonuses to earnings growth in February, and the downward contributions from bonuses were diminishing. Regular pay in the year to March was up .%, from a low point of .% in January, and appeared to be associated with the recovery in hours. But pay settlements were edging lower and overall pay pressures remained subdued.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##Oil prices had fallen in sterling terms by about  % on average over the past month, but there had been little change to the futures curve and hence to the impact of oil on longer-term prospects for inflation. The Economist index of commodity prices had fallen % in sterling terms between April and May, mainly reflecting the agriculture component.##NewPara##Past increases in oil prices had started to feed through the pricing chain. Producer input prices had risen by .% in April, and output prices by .% when excise duties were excluded. Survey measures of input and output prices, both in manufacturing and services, also showed some upward trend this year. And the recent depreciation of sterling would be expected eventually to add to input costs. However, the balances shown in surveys of producers  output price expectations, both for manufacturing and services, remained modest by historical standards.##NewPara##RPIX had increased by .% in the year to April, broadly as expected. The twelve-month rate of increase was likely to remain around or slightly above % over the next few months.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The latest Reuters poll of market expectations suggested a central expectation that interest rates would be left unchanged this month, but the probability attached to an increase had risen from % in May to % in June. There had been an increase in the implied volatility of three-month sterling interest rates, suggesting an increase in market uncertainty about the timing of a change in interest rates.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The context for the policy decision this month was the Committee s need to assess whether the ongoing stimulus to private sector demand from past reductions in interest rates, coupled with increasing government demand, was consistent with domestic demand growth slowing down at a time and a rate which accommodated the expected increase in external demand. The May Inflation Report projections had forecast inflation to remain below the target of .% for most of the two-year horizon, but to be rising quite sharply at the end of the two-year period, taking it above the target, with the balance of risks on the upside of the central projection. This had implied that an increase in interest rates would eventually be necessary, in order to restrain the growth of private domestic demand as external demand recovered and public spending increased. International news over the past month had not materially changed this picture. The main economic developments over the past month which the Committee now had to assess were, first, the significance of the weaker-than-expected and downwardly revised GDP estimate for the first quarter;  second, the fall in sterling over the month; and third, the greater-than-expected current and prospective strength of private consumption,##NewPara##associated in part with robust house price increases. Most members thought that, on balance, these developments had brought forward the time at which an increase in interest rates would be required. The key issue was how pre-emptive such an increase needed to be, given the continuing uncertainties about the strength of international and domestic economic recovery and the fact that inflation was below target and expected to remain so for some time.##NewPara##The Committee identified a number of arguments for leaving the repo rate unchanged this month, to which different members attached different weights. First, there were still substantial uncertainties in the economic outlook. The strength of the world recovery was not yet fully established. For the domestic economy, the signs of strength were in the surveys rather than the official data, and the extent to which the recently announced Budget measures would contribute to higher demand further out was also not clear. Second, there was uncertainty about the estimate for GDP for the first quarter. Third, it was too soon to tell whether the fall in the sterling exchange rate would persist, and to what extent it would affect domestic inflation. Fourth, equity and oil prices had fallen in the past month, which would tend to restrain inflation, and there was little evidence of domestic cost and price pressures in the near term. Finally, inflation had been forecast to be below the target for most of the two-year horizon. While interest rate changes took about two years to have their full effect, some impact would be felt more quickly. Delaying interest rate increases was therefore more likely to keep inflation close to the target at all times, as was required by the Government s Remit.##NewPara##The Committee also identified a number of arguments for increasing the repo rate, in either this or the following months, to which different members again attached different weights. First, the decline in the sterling exchange rate, were it to persist, would have a material effect on inflation. A mechanical update of the Inflation Report projections taking account of the depreciation would give a somewhat higher central forecast for inflation at the two-year horizon, and a shorter period during which inflation would be clearly below the target. Second, the current repo rate of % implied a real interest rate some way below its likely long-run equilibrium. This represented a continuing monetary stimulus which, given that output was generally regarded as close to potential, would, taken in isolation, be expected eventually to push inflation above target. To the extent that the current level of interest rates reflected the response to the events of  September to support confidence, an increase could now be contemplated, given the subsequent recovery in confidence. This would signal to those making spending plans that real interest rates could not remain so low indefinitely. Third, inflation##NewPara##was expected to be increasing quite steeply at the two-year horizon. The passage of time itself strengthened the case for an increase in rates, and delaying an increase could mean that a larger increase in rates would eventually be necessary. Fourth, the prospects for demand going forward looked buoyant. A strong rebound in activity in the second quarter could be expected given the evidence from a range of surveys, the strength of the housing market, household money and borrowing growth, the latest information on retail sales and vehicle registrations, and possibly also from world demand. Finally, by the time world economic recovery was clearly established, it might be too late to restrain its consequences for UK inflation.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that these arguments were finely balanced. Raising rates too soon ran the risk of stifling the recovery while leaving a rise too late ran the risk of allowing demand growth to put undue pressure on the supply capacity of the economy and so of allowing inflationary momentum to develop. Most members felt that, given the outlook for inflation, which on the central projection was expected to remain below or close to target for some time, it was not yet necessary to increase interest rates. Some delay would give the Committee more information on the strength of economic recovery at home and abroad, and on whether the recent exchange rate movements would be reversed or would continue.  One member argued that if the May  Inflation Report projections were to be updated now, the central projection for inflation two years ahead would be close to %, with the risks on the upside, and rising quite sharply beyond the forecast horizon. Given the fall in the exchange rate, a modest rise in interest rates now would help to rebalance the economy. It might also provide a useful signal, to consumers and to house buyers, which could reduce the extent to which interest rates might ultimately need to rise. It would also emphasise the principle, shared by all members of the Committee, that although inflation might well fall over the next few months, it was important that policy was set on the basis of prospective and not current inflation.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. Seven members of the committee (the Governor, David Clementi, Christopher Allsopp, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Stephen Nickell and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. Mervyn King voted against, preferring an increase in the repo rate of  basis points.