Monetary growth##NewPara##M lending had slowed slightly over the quarter, driven by a fall in the growth of company borrowing. But otherwise the picture was much the same as in August. In particular, Divisia money had grown more than expected and the broad money balances of Other Financial Institutions (OFIs) had continued to grow at a very fast rate. Analysis by Bank staff using models of sectoral demand for money suggested that there probably remained a liquidity overhang in the OFI sector, and in particular amongst Life Assurance companies and Pension Funds (LAPFs). Staff work also suggested that the level of M velocity was below trend, supporting the picture from sectoral analysis that there was probably an aggregate money overhang. It seemed possible though that much of the decline in M velocity in recent years could be explained by the rise in the wealth/income ratio.##NewPara##There were various possible interpretations of the implications of the monetary situation for future demand and inflationary pressures. There was an argument that the large cumulative growth in broad money over recent years did not represent a clear inflationary threat, given the possibility that much of it could be explained by the increase in the wealth/income ratio. However, it was not clear##NewPara##that this increase represented a sustained change; it might alternatively be transitory, caused by asset price appreciation in a loose monetary environment. And even if it were sustained, it still left a material overhang in the OFI sector.##NewPara##Another possible view was that it was important to look at both aggregate and sectoral money developments. Real broad money balances had been growing at a fast rate, pointing to strong real demand and inflationary pressures. Rapid growth in total OFI money balances could lead increases in wealth, as had been the case in the late s when it was a clear symptom of inflationary conditions. Furthermore, there were identified ways in which OFI money growth could enter the transmission mechanism. It could feed through to asset prices or directly into spending if it was passed to the personal or company sectors and not used to repay bank loans. A variant of this was that, within OFIs, the focus should be on LAPF money growth, on the view that growth in OFI balances reflecting increased intermediation via repo markets should not be a concern.##NewPara##Another interpretation was that the focus should not be on aggregate M, but more on Divisia, as an indicator of transactions money, and on total financial wealth. This would be on the grounds that the non-transactions element of broad money could not be distinguished conceptually from other wealth holdings. This approach did, however, lead to much the same concern about the outlook for demand and inflation on account of higher than expected Divisia growth and the rapid growth of financial wealth.##NewPara##It was agreed that the monetary data continued to create upside risks to the inflation outlook.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##There was an extensive debate on capacity and labour market pressures. The key issues were##NewPara##(i) the rate at which pressures on productive capacity were building up; (ii) whether there was any slack left and in particular at what point pressures of demand relative to supply would feed into inflation; and (iii) how quickly demand pressures would abate given the policy tightening already implemented.##NewPara##At %, GDP growth had been faster in Q than expected at the time of the August Inflation Report, and was well above trend. The labour market had continued to tighten on most measures; for example, claimant count unemployment (excluding Jobs Seekers Allowance effects) had been falling by around -, per month, taking short term unemployment to levels not seen since the period of unsustainable growth in the late s. There was clear agreement that, with growth in Q continuing well above any plausible estimate of trend, the degree of slack was lower than anticipated in August. But there could be no certainty about where output was in relation to trend.##NewPara##There was some evidence that pressures on capacity might not be immediately threatening and might in fact be declining. The Q British Chamber of Commerce (BCC) survey suggested that the number of manufacturing firms operating at full capacity was, at %, around the long run average; and recruitment intentions, while still positive, had fallen since Q. The number of service sector firms at full capacity remained above the long run average but had declined from the  peak. It was suggested that pressures in the service sector were easing as extra capacity came on stream; the BCC survey balance of service sector firms investing in plant and machinery was higher than at any point since the survey began in . Firms were also reporting increased levels of training.##NewPara##But there was also opposing evidence. The BCC survey recorded a balance of nearly % of manufacturing firms experiencing recruitment difficulties, compared with a long run average balance  of around %; and a balance of over % of service sector firms in that position, compared with a long run average of around %. In the October CBI Industrial Trends survey, which gave a more recent reading than the Q BCC survey, the balance of manufacturing firms not working below capacity had recently risen sharply, to above %. Skilled labour shortages were reported as increasing in the manufacturing sector. The Bank s regional Agents supported this picture for the economy more widely and were warning of increased wage pressures in . But it was suggested that the absence of any recent increases in economy wide earnings growth might point to sectoral variations in labour market tightening; any premium having to be paid in especially tight sectors might be being offset by lower earnings growth in other sectors.##NewPara##There was agreement that the important question was at which point the pressure of demand on supply would feed into higher inflation and inflation expectations. In an arithmetic sense, earnings##NewPara##growth of around  /- /% could be regarded as either the maximum or the minimum consistent with the  /% inflation target given trend productivity growth of around % a year. It could be argued that, at the current juncture falling unemployment and rising employment should be viewed as a clear warning sign; earnings growth was much more likely to rise and feed into higher retail price increases. Alternatively the last step of this argument might not be axiomatic. Some US commentators were saying that even if wages accelerated, prices need not follow in line, but instead profit margins could fall for a time. That might also happen in the UK.##NewPara##The assessment turned on whether there had been a material reduction in the natural rate of unemployment - the rate consistent with stable inflation. It was possible that the natural rate had fallen not only during the s but also again, materially, during the s on account of continuing labour market reforms, such as the introduction of the Job Seekers Allowance. On the other hand, it was possible that the natural rate had fallen but that unemployment was nevertheless now close to or at the natural rate. There was agreement that there was enormous uncertainty about the natural rate and also, as discussed at the October meeting, that there could be  speed limit  pressures on inflation as any remaining gap closed.##NewPara##In summary, all agreed that output growth was still well above trend, that the labour market continued to tighten, and that, if any slack remained, it was being  used up  quickly.##NewTopic##Retail sales and retail margins##NewPara##The Committee discussed what weight it should give to retail sales having fallen by .% in September. This had widely been attributed to the funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales and also to unusually warm weather depressing sales of clothing and footwear. It had followed eight consecutive monthly rises, the longest such sequence since , suggesting considerable underlying strength. The most recent consumer confidence surveys from MORI and GFK were both strong, and there was an expectation that spending of the windfalls from the summer s building society and insurance company demutualisations would continue in Q, especially around Christmas.  The Committee agreed that the September retail sales figure was not, taken on its own, evidence of a slowdown.##NewPara##The outlook for retail margins was highly uncertain. They had widened during Q, reflecting the modest pass through of sterling s appreciation into retail prices. On one view, the rise in margins was not surprising and might not unwind, given the strength of current and prospective consumption. Cyclically, this was a time to rebuild margins. Moreover, if sterling s appreciation was causing valuation losses on overseas earnings, there was a strong incentive to protect overall profitability by not cutting domestic margins.##NewPara##On another view, it would be surprising if retail profit margins fell back from current levels, given the lack of clear statistical evidence of any past cyclical component in their behaviour.##NewPara##A third view would be that there were structural reasons to expect a fall. Competition in the retail sector remained intense. The main force behind the recent rise in retail margins had been weak input prices rather than increases in retail prices. As demand and output slowed and firms  growth forecasts were revised down, margins should fall.##NewPara##It was agreed that the assumption in the Inflation Report forecast should be that it was most likely that part of the recent rise in retail margins would unwind, but with the balance of risks for the next year weighted towards their being stronger than in the central case.##NewTopic##Net trade##NewPara##The Committee regarded the outlook for net trade as a very important area of uncertainty. So far the impact of sterling s appreciation had been much less than expected; for example, preliminary data suggested that, excluding oil and erratics, the three month on previous  month growth rate of export volumes had risen to  /% in August from .% in July. The key issue was whether the lags were simply longer than had been thought or whether there would be less of an effect.##NewPara##One possible explanation was the strength of external demand. OECD data suggested that in the first half of  the UK s export markets for goods had grown strongly, which may have helped to sustain export volumes in spite of the appreciation. There had also been a striking growth in exports outside Europe. It was possible that UK exporters had responded by increasing their efforts##NewPara##to penetrate new markets, against which sterling s appreciation had been smaller than against continental Europe.##NewPara##A second contributory factor might be that exporters had initially cut margins in order maintain market share, in which case they might eventually have to cut costs to rebuild profitability. There was some support for this from anecdotal evidence that managements were taking further measures to cut costs.##NewPara##It was possible that the real exchange rate had appreciated because of supply side improvements, or quality enhancements. It was noted that a recent CBI study suggested that a large proportion of UK manufacturing firms fell short of  best practice  in terms of productivity, so that there was scope for such improvements. This was consistent with the assumption about the path of the exchange rate in the central projection of the November Inflation Report; some of the portfolio or erratic factors contributing to sterling s appreciation had unwound faster than assumed in August, and it was now assumed that the most likely course was that there would be no further unwind of these factors, leading to a slower rate of depreciation in the central case than in August. The possibility of a further unwind was instead reflected in a skewed balance of risks around the central projection.##NewPara##A further possibility was that, against a history of relatively high exchange rate volatility, firms had originally thought the appreciation would be temporary, and had thus accepted what they regarded as temporary falls in export margins. If true, as the appreciation persisted, firms would increasingly regard sterling s higher level as permanent, and the volume effects on net trade would bite. However, it could be argued that, if this were so, surveys of expected export volumes should be showing a continuing deterioration, whereas the latest CIPS monthly survey had shown renewed growth and the CBI survey had shown a slightly less negative balance. Against this, the slightly less up to date quarterly BCC survey reported manufactured export sales at a five year low.##NewPara##The Committee agreed that the picture on net trade was difficult to assess. Notwithstanding the limited impact so far, the most likely effect of a % appreciation over a year was that net exports would make a marked negative contribution to GDP growth next year, so that the impact was delayed. But as time passed without concrete evidence of this, the possibility of a smaller effect increased. To the extent that a reduced sensitivity of exports to worsening competitiveness reflected##NewPara##supply-side improvements (such as higher productivity and efficiency), a smaller than expected effect from sterling s appreciation on exports need not signal increased inflationary pressure.##NewTopic##Developments in Asia and financial market volatility##NewPara##In a discussion of the Asian situation, it was noted that circumstances had moved on since the summer when the IMF view had been relatively optimistic. More countries were now affected, creating a risk of weaker net exports to and profits from the region. However, Asia accounted for a small part of UK trade directly, and there had been an offsetting improvement in short run growth prospects in Continental Europe. The more important question, therefore, was the potential for knock-on effects in other regions, for example Latin America, or for the emergence of other financial fragility concerns.##NewPara##The Committee thought that, as yet, there were no obviously new fragility issues. The fall in the UK equity markets was modest set against the rise over the past year, so there was little impact on wealth. Other European and North American markets had also so far fared better than emerging markets. The Committee concluded that the recent financial market volatility did not of itself require an easing of policy or inhibit a tightening of policy. But the situation should be monitored carefully, and policy would need to be reassessed if any future financial market developments were to threaten a sharp deterioration in the economic outlook.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee discussed the implications of the inflation forecast prepared for the November Inflation Report. On the basis of unchanged interest rates at %, output growth was initially expected to decline, reflecting past policy tightening, the weakening of the windfall effect, and also a delayed effect on net trade from sterling s appreciation. It then rose again as the net trade effect on the twelve month growth rate passed. The range of uncertainty was large. At the two year horizon, the central projection for inflation was above the target of  /% and gently rising, with the risks clearly weighted towards the upside. The issue therefore was whether an interest rate increase was needed. A bp rise would take the central projection to more or less where it had been in August, around  /% two years hence, and move the mass of the probability distribution##NewPara##downwards. The risks would remain skewed on the upside. The probability of inflation falling below the target in the short run would be lower than in August, reflecting a higher starting point for inflation.##NewPara##The Committee discussed three possible interpretations of the evidence. One was that, tactical considerations aside, there was a case for not changing interest rates this month. There had been both good and bad news about the inflation outlook since the Committee s October meeting. There were signs that service sector growth had peaked; survey evidence suggested the net trade effect of sterling s appreciation would still come through; and monetary and fiscal policy had both already been tightened, with inevitably lagged effects, so patience was needed. While domestic demand remained strong, it was likely that output growth was now peaking and there were clear downside risks to output next year. Also robust growth would bring with it capacity increases and could raise activity and employment amongst groups of workers that had become detached from the labour force. This would contribute to offsetting inflationary pressures. On this view there was a case for waiting to see how the slowdown developed before increasing rates again.##NewPara##A second placed greater emphasis on the continuing strength of demand notwithstanding the existing policy tightening and sterling s appreciation. The majority of evidence since the August Inflation Report pointed to continuing inflationary pressures. The risks of net trade not slowing, and so relieving pressure on capacity, increased as time passed with no concrete evidence that it was happening. The updated central projection on unchanged rates did not itself require an immediate increase but, given the upside balance of risks, it was important to act now to meet the target.##NewPara##A third was that a /% step was needed now, and indeed that some further increases might be necessary. Growth remained unsustainably strong and the labour market continued to tighten. Since the Committee s August decision to pause to observe accumulating evidence on the balance of risks, most of the data had been stronger than expected, and sterling had fallen back by more than was expected. Though a slowdown was already likely next year, this was too uncertain and risked being too late to prevent inflation and inflation expectations rising. The money numbers underlined this. It was argued that the balance of risks between raising and not raising rates was asymmetric. There was a high probability that, as well as growing at an above trend rate, the level of output was now higher than potential. A policy tightening would bring output back to its trend level more quickly, and if##NewPara##necessary interest rates could be cut if new evidence emerged that the economy was weaker than expected. If, on the other hand, policy was not tightened, there was a risk that inflation expectations would rise as strong demand pressures persisted. The Committee might then find itself having to tighten sharply, increasing the risk of a recession, to bring things back on course. The predominance of upside risks to inflation therefore required an early move.##NewPara##Turning to tactical considerations, the Committee noted that, although a rise would probably come as a surprise to some, any initial impact on financial markets might be reassessed once the Inflation Report was published. The Committee considered whether the recent disturbed conditions in financial markets should inhibit it from raising rates. It judged that conditions in the domestic UK markets were not sufficiently fragile for a delay to be necessary and a tightening was unlikely to have  a significant effect on worldwide financial markets. There were attractions in moving before the publication of some of the data due out in the next month, given the possibility of a rebound in retail sales growth from the September dip and a likely strong RPIX outturn for October. The Committee might then find itself increasing rates in an environment where it was wrongly perceived as reacting to specific bad data.##NewPara##The Committee then voted unanimously in favour of a / percentage point rise in the Bank s repo rate, to be announced immediately.