The world economy##NewPara##News on the world economy had not pointed consistently in one direction. There was nevertheless a clear difference between developments in the United States and the euro area. In the United States, although recent indicators had been mixed, the pace of economic growth seemed broadly consistent with what had been envisaged at the time of the November Inflation Report. Overall, a mixed pattern of indicators such as this was typical of an economy in the early stages of recovery. Some evidence suggested strength: manufacturing production had risen in November, and there had been an unexpectedly large rise in the survey indicator of confidence in manufacturing from the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) in December, with new orders picking up sharply.  Sales of cars in the fourth quarter were likely to have been stronger than had been expected in November, but this appeared to have reflected an increase in incentives to consumers, which might have brought forward spending from  rather than creating additional demand. Other evidence suggested less buoyancy: the labour market data for November had shown a fall in non-farm payrolls (although this implied that robust productivity growth had continued); and the ISM indicator of non-manufacturing confidence had weakened in December, although its level was still pointing to expansion in that sector. Consumer confidence indicators were giving mixed signals, but it appeared that consumers  concerns about the general economic situation had increased, possibly reflecting the weaker labour market and perhaps also the geopolitical situation. Mortgage refinancing activity was still strong, although less so than in the summer and autumn of , and it was thought that there was still a stock of mortgages which could be refinanced. Personal sector income gearing had still been historically high in the third quarter, because the increase in indebtedness had offset lower servicing costs. There were only limited signs of a pick-up in investment growth. Non-defence capital goods orders fell in November, and it##NewPara##was unlikely that investment would contribute strongly to the economic recovery in the near future.##NewPara##The recently announced US fiscal package would tend to support domestic demand there if it were passed broadly as proposed. Although a further fiscal stimulus had been seen as a possibility for some time, the measures announced were somewhat larger than most commentators had expected.##NewPara##The impact of some of the measures proposed was uncertain:  for example, a rise in equity prices might have been expected in response to the proposed elimination of taxation on dividends received by investors, although it was not clear what would have happened to equity prices in the absence of the proposal. But it was likely that the package would result in an increase in personal disposable income, and so encourage consumption. This might add to one manifestation of the imbalances in the US economy. One counterpart to the rise in the government sector deficit might be a fall in the financial deficit of the household sector and an associated rise in household saving or a fall in their borrowing.##NewPara##Moreover, the recent fall in the dollar, if sustained, would tend to counteract any increase in the current account deficit resulting from additional domestic demand.##NewPara##In the euro area, by contrast, the data published since the November Inflation Report had on balance been more subdued than expected, reflecting, in particular, weaker economic performance and confidence in Germany. Industrial production had fallen in October in the euro area in aggregate, and by more than % in Germany. The manufacturing PMI survey had fallen in December, again with Germany falling by more than average, while the euro-area services survey had shown little change. Although the European Commission s measure of industrial confidence had risen in December, consumer confidence had fallen, mainly reflecting the public perception of the general economic position rather than their own finances. In the euro area outside Germany, the data were mixed. For example, French consumption had increased in  Q, and French business and consumer confidence had improved in December, but consumer confidence had deteriorated sharply in Italy in that month. It was noted that the economic indicators for the euro area as a whole would probably not reflect the effect of the recent monetary policy easing by the ECB for a while. Overall, developments in the euro area outside Germany were broadly consistent with the projections embodied in the November Inflation Report. But the weakness in Germany implied below-trend growth for the euro area in aggregate in ; and the Inflation Report projections for  now lay above both the most recent European Commission forecast and the centre of the range forecast by the ECB.##NewPara##Both economic data and confidence surveys had recently been weaker in Germany than for the euro area as a whole. The Committee noted that it was likely that the high levels of prices and unit labour costs in Germany relative to its partner countries were adversely affecting its competitive position and domestic profitability. The likelihood that taxes would be increased may have affected confidence about future income growth.##NewPara##Estimates of Japanese GDP growth for the first two quarters of  had recently been revised downwards, although there was still thought to have been an improved growth performance in the second and third quarters. Expenditure by households was estimated to have risen in  Q, but had subsequently been much weaker. Japanese exports to other Asian countries had been growing robustly during , reflecting the recovery elsewhere in Asia, and the December Tankan report had shown some improvement in industrial sentiment.##NewPara##There had been some notable movements in international financial markets. The euro had appreciated against the dollar by around % since the Committee s December meeting, and in overall effective terms by about %. Although this would dampen external demand in the euro area, there could be some short-run positive influence on domestic demand if inflation were reduced, temporarily increasing real disposable income and facilitating lower interest rates than would otherwise have prevailed. Equity indices in most of the major economies were little changed or somewhat lower on the month, but the German DAX index had fallen by about %. Market interest rates had fallen in all the major markets, particularly at short and medium maturities. Other things being equal, this would tend to support activity.##NewPara##The extent and timing of the change in the dollar-euro exchange rate had been surprising, given that it had coincided with expansionary fiscal measures in the United States and the increasing likelihood that some euro-area countries would take action to reduce their fiscal deficits. The movement also appeared to contradict the perception that currencies  strength reflected relative growth performance and prospects: the news about the outlook for the US economy in  seemed to have been more robust than that for the euro-area economy.  There were various possible explanations. First, the US current account deficit, which was running at well over % of GDP, might now be viewed with more concern by financial market participants. Second, although recent US economic data had on balance been broadly consistent with the outlook envisaged in the November Inflation Report, some market participants might have anticipated a more rapid recovery, and may therefore##NewPara##have been disappointed by these data. Third, markets might have changed their view of the likely reaction of the Federal Reserve. The US yield curve had fallen sharply at about a year ahead, suggesting a delay to the time at which the market expected the Fed to begin raising rates towards a neutral level. The relative movement in interest rates between the United States and the euro area had, however, been far smaller because the euro-area yield curve had also moved sharply downwards over the past month. Finally, there was some evidence that international political and military uncertainty had had an adverse impact on the dollar, and had affected other markets. The Swiss franc, gold and spot oil prices had all risen. But the evidence was not conclusive: if there had been a general rise in risk aversion, higher corporate bond spreads might also have been expected.##NewTopic##Money, credit and asset prices##NewPara##The effective exchange rate for sterling had fallen by about  % since the Committee s December meeting, leaving it a similar amount below the level envisaged at the time of the November Inflation Report. This was apparently related to the large move in the dollar-euro rate: sterling had appreciated by about % against the dollar and depreciated similarly against the euro, but the euro has greater weight in the sterling effective index. On a longer perspective, the current level of the index was still inside a range within which sterling had traded for several years. The Committee considered whether the UK external position might have had an independent influence on the fall in sterling. The latest estimates for the current account deficit suggested that it would be around % of GDP in , which was close to its average for the past forty years. However, the trade deficit had widened rapidly since early . The growing difference between these two deficits reflected the higher UK net investment income, but it was not clear that this was sustainable. The Committee also noted the uncertainty attached to estimates of trade deficits.##NewPara##As in other major economies, UK short-term nominal and real market interest rates had fallen, implying support for domestic demand. But the FTSE All-Share index had fallen by around % during the month and was now some % below the level envisaged in the November Inflation Report projections. A reduction in the repo rate was perceived by market participants as unlikely at this meeting, but the repo rate was now expected to remain at its current level for longer than previously expected.##NewPara##The annual growth rate of borrowing from banks and building societies by the household sector had been increasing continuously for a year and a half, and had been over % in November. Borrowing for consumption was estimated to have risen to around % of personal disposable income in  Q, and was likely to represent a similar proportion in the fourth quarter. Household debt was at historical highs as a percentage of income. However, the inflation-adjusted household saving ratio was close to its average level for the past  years, and the personal sector s net financial deficit had been estimated at around zero in recent quarters. That implied that households had in aggregate been acquiring financial assets at the same rate as debt. It was difficult to assess from this information how great was the risk that the personal sector in aggregate might need to reduce its borrowing and consumption abruptly if there were an adverse shock. With nominal interest rates low, households  debt servicing was also low and seemed unlikely to be a source of serious problems unless there was a material adverse shock affecting interest rates or income prospects. Moreover, the aggregate financial balance data suggested that the risk of a sharp change to consumption was less than might be thought on the basis of the aggregate borrowing figures alone. But that risk depended on the balance sheet position of the household sector, and that in turn required an assessment of disaggregated data, for example whether the most indebted households also held substantial assets, and how liquid those assets were.##NewPara##The annual growth rate of bank lending to private non-financial corporations had recently increased, to over  % in November. And data from the major British banking groups suggested that the rate of decline of bank lending to manufacturing companies was moderating. These data, together with the decline in yields on corporate bonds, suggested an easing in corporate credit conditions which might to some extent have offset the rise in the cost of capital implied by the most recent falls in equity prices.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##The National Accounts data released in December showed that UK GDP had grown by .% in  Q, representing an upward revision of . percentage point from the original estimate. Taking account of revisions to earlier data, the estimated level of GDP in Q was around .% above the level expected at the time of the November Inflation Report. However, various indicators suggested that output growth might have slowed in Q: manufacturing output had fallen in October; and the December manufacturing surveys by the CBI and the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply##NewPara##(CIPS) and the CIPS services survey, taken together, pointed to a slowing in output growth. On balance, the degree of pressure on supply capacity by the end of  looked likely to have been broadly in line with what had been expected at the time of the November Inflation Report. The revisions to past GDP data resolved some earlier puzzles; for example, the slightly stronger profile for growth during the winter of - implied that the extent of labour hoarding, which the Committee had found surprising at the time, had been less than thought. The Committee considered whether the revisions to GDP and the latest data on tax revenues implied a change to the average tax rate, and concluded that it was too early to tell.##NewPara##The latest estimate for whole economy investment in  Q was that it had been little changed on the previous quarter, having previously been estimated to have fallen sharply. However, business investment had fallen. The latest revisions to past data offered less evidence that business investment had weakened as sharply in the immediate aftermath of the terrorist attacks in September  as previously thought; rather, it appeared that investment had weakened steadily throughout the past two years. The Committee noted that as the relative price of investment goods had been falling for many years, it was likely that the equilibrium constant price investment-output ratio would continue to rise, implying a recovery in investment at some stage. But, despite the recent weakness of investment, it was not clear that this could be expected soon. Indeed, the January CIPS manufacturing survey suggested that prospects remained subdued: the index of new orders for investment goods was lower than those for intermediate or consumer goods.##NewPara##Consumption growth was unrevised at .% in  Q. But its level had been revised downwards, because of revisions to data for earlier quarters. There were some tentative signs in the fourth quarter that consumption growth might be moderating. The November retail sales data showed only a slight increase over October. The growth of notes and coin in circulation had fallen in November and December. Reports from the Bank s regional Agents and survey evidence from the British Retail Consortium (BRC) suggested that there had been a sluggish start to the Christmas season, but that sales had picked up close to and immediately after Christmas. Reports from individual retailers were mixed. However, experience suggested that data for December needed to be reviewed together with those for January to assess the underlying trends in retail sales, given the large seasonal swings. Moreover, retail sales could be an erratic guide to overall consumption. It was possible that data on consumer services expenditure would show some strength, and borrowing for consumption was likely to be at least as high as a proportion of personal disposable income in Q as it had been in##NewPara##Q, so it was not yet certain that there had been any material slowdown in consumption growth.##NewPara##Consumption growth had for some time been supported by accelerating household borrowing, in turn associated with the strength of the housing market.  There were some signs that the rate of increase of house prices might be beginning to moderate. Judging by the change in the three months to December over the previous three months, house price inflation appeared to have eased a little.##NewPara##Reports from the Bank s Agents were also consistent with a less buoyant market, and house prices in London and the South East, which tended to lead housing market trends in other parts of the country, were more clearly slowing, at least for higher-value properties. Nevertheless, house prices had probably increased by more in  Q than had been envisaged in the November Inflation Report and so the house price-earnings ratio might have moved further above its longer-run equilibrium level.##NewPara##This implied that house prices would need to grow more slowly than previously expected at some point in the future, although the equilibrium level depended on a range of longer-term demand and supply factors and was itself highly uncertain.##NewTopic##The labour market##NewPara##Demand and supply conditions in the labour market had remained broadly stable. Employment had grown by , in the three months to October, although much of this reflected an increase in part-time employment. However, the rate of unemployment, at .% on the Labour Force Survey (LFS) measure, had been little changed during . Inactivity had fallen in recent months, and over a longer perspective the rise in employment had been broadly in line with population growth, suggesting no material change in the pressure on labour supply. Surveys of employment intentions suggested that the pattern of stable or gently increasing employment was likely to continue.##NewPara##The rate of growth of earnings had been steady in the second half of  at between  % and % overall, although public sector earnings growth was increasing again after being subdued for several months in the summer. There were some possible upward influences on earnings over the next few months. The twelve-month rate of increase in the Retail Price Index in November had been . percentage points higher than a year earlier, and the corresponding figure for the Tax and Price Index (an index which reflects the impact of tax changes as well as of changes in the prices of goods and services on personal disposable income) had been . percentage points. This could put upward pressure on pay settlements this spring. But the likely effect of the forthcoming rises in employers ##NewPara##and employees  National Insurance contributions remained uncertain. Corporate profitability remained quite weak, which would limit the ability of employers to pay large increases.##NewTopic##Prices and costs##NewPara##The spot price of Brent crude oil had risen by over $ per barrel, or  %, since the Committee s December meeting. The increase had been mitigated a little by the appreciation of sterling against the dollar, but was still  % in sterling terms. The outlook for oil prices in the near term had recently been affected by several diverse factors, for example: industrial action cutting production in Venezuela; the risk of hostilities in the Middle East; the level of US government oil stocks; and the ability and willingness of the OPEC countries to continue to produce in excess of previously agreed quotas, or to raise quotas, when prices were high. Spot oil prices were therefore particularly uncertain month-to-month and could be very volatile. However, the price of six-month oil futures had been more stable, implying that the recent volatility in oil prices need not have substantial consequences for the medium-term outlook for inflation, as long as short-term movements in oil prices did not become entrenched in inflation expectations and wage behaviour.##NewPara##Overall, inflation in  Q would probably now be higher than projected in the November Inflation Report. But this need not have implications for inflation in the medium term, as the factors responsible for this were likely to be transitory. The rise in spot oil prices, and its effect on petrol prices, implied short-term upward pressure on RPIX inflation. The strong growth in house prices in  had contributed to a rise in the housing depreciation component of RPIX, but if the equilibrium level of house prices to earnings had not changed, the recent faster-than-expected increases in house prices implied, at the very least, slower increases in future. The swing in RPIX inflation from around  % in mid- to close to % by the end of  illustrated the extent to which inflation could be driven by temporary influences which were of limited significance for underlying inflationary pressures and monetary policy.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##There was little market expectation of an immediate change in the repo rate. The latest Reuters poll of economists showed that respondents attached a mean probability of % to a  basis point reduction at the January meeting, and none was forecasting a reduction.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##The Committee agreed that, although there was a wide range of information to take into account this month, the net impact of the news was difficult to assess. The world economy was on balance slightly weaker. The overall news from the United States might be slightly on the upside taking account of the fiscal package, but the euro area, especially Germany, was weaker. Some Committee members remained concerned that weak confidence in Germany might begin to spill over to other countries in the euro area. The effects of the current international political tensions were not clear, although they might be having some dampening effect on survey indicators of confidence, and perhaps also on demand, both in the rest of the world and the United Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, there had been some signs that retail sales growth had been sluggish in early December, but it had probably since picked up and the recent underlying trend in consumption was not yet clear. There were some tentative signs that the rate of increase in house prices was moderating. Both these developments had been expected to materialise at some stage. Output growth had recently been around trend, and there was no sign in the monetary or labour data that the economy was about to weaken abruptly, despite the gloomy tone of some recent commentators. RPIX inflation looked likely to be a little stronger in the near term than at the time of the Inflation Report, but this was as a result of factors which seemed  likely to be temporary.##NewPara##Most members had taken the view at the December meeting that inflation was broadly on track to meet the target in the medium term and that the risks around the projection were roughly balanced. For these members, the information received this month, taken together, did not contain a clear message about the prospects for inflation. Various arguments, to which different members attached different weights, supported this judgement. First, although the balance of indicators on the world economy was probably negative on the month, the impact on UK inflation in the medium term might be relatively limited. And in the event that the downside global risks were to crystallise, there was scope for policy responses overseas to support activity. Second, house price inflation looked likely to be stronger in  Q than projected, although there were some signs of the long-expected slowdown. Third, the evidence that consumption growth was moderating, as had been envisaged in the November Inflation Report projections, was still tentative, and the monetary data suggested that growth in credit would support consumption and, possibly, investment. Fourth, the depreciation in sterling relative to the Inflation Report assumption, and the substantial fall in short and medium-term interest rates relative to market expectations at that time, would support activity and tend to increase##NewPara##inflation if they were sustained, although the fall in equity prices would moderate this to some extent. Overall, both monetary and fiscal policy were already supportive. Finally, the recent diverse news   about the world, about the domestic economy, and from financial markets   could be assessed more fully in the forthcoming forecast round. These arguments, taken together, implied that no change in the repo rate was needed this month.##NewPara##Some members, however, continued to believe that an immediate repo rate reduction was warranted.  First, these members had and still thought that the most likely path for inflation over the   next two years would be slightly lower than the central projection in the November Inflation Report, and that the balance of risks lay on the downside. Second, the balance of news from the world economy over the past two months had been negative; there were longer-term downward pressures on world inflation coming from increased international competition; and there were significant downside risks, in particular from the euro area, where consumer confidence was weak. Third, the upside risks to inflation were modest, with labour market conditions benign, and consumption and house price increases moderating. Finally, on this view, the risk of an unsustainable build-up in household debt and the current account deficit might not be as severe as some thought, and, in any case, should not prevent a repo rate reduction which was needed to support activity and maintain inflation close to target in the medium term. The current account was around its average level of the past four decades, and the household sector had been close to financial balance in recent quarters.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the Bank s repo rate should be maintained at .%. Seven members of the Committee (the Governor, Mervyn King, Andrew Large, Kate Barker, Charles Bean, Marian Bell and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. Christopher Allsopp and Stephen Nickell voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.