The world economy##NewPara##There was still some contrast between recent developments in international financial markets and recent data and surveys from the world economy. Oil prices had fallen further, and equity prices in most major markets had risen further, on the month. However, while there were signs of recovery in consumer confidence in the United States following the end of the hostilities in Iraq, other indicators had been mixed, and the news from the euro area was weaker.##NewPara##In the United States, GDP growth in  Q was estimated to have been .%, somewhat lower than had been projected at the time of the February Inflation Report. Consumption had been weak in the first quarter as a whole, but had strengthened in March, supported by spending on cars. After the fall of Baghdad, both the Conference Board and the Michigan indices of consumer confidence had risen sharply, and weekly measures of retail sales had also recovered. Longer-term US interest rates had declined during the month, and this was likely to encourage further remortgaging and equity withdrawal, which would in turn lend support to consumption. However, non-farm payrolls had fallen by over half a million since October , and the unemployment rate had risen. Weaker labour market conditions posed a downside risk to consumption looking forward. Indicators from industry and manufacturing were mixed. Business investment had fallen in the first quarter, despite a recovery in output in the information, communications and technology (ICT) sector. Surveys of producer activity had not shown a uniform post-war rebound: the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) non- manufacturing index had risen in April, but the ISM manufacturing index had fallen.##NewPara##The latest indicators for the euro area, taken together, looked weaker. There had been a small rise in euro-area industrial production in February. But there had been no evidence of improvement in the euro-area manufacturing and services PMI for April, after the fall of Baghdad, and the latest business confidence indices from the European Commission and IFO in Germany had fallen, although##NewPara##euro-area consumer confidence had moved up in April for the first time in seven months. Although there had been upward revisions to earlier quarters, GDP in France was estimated to have fallen in   Q, which reinforced the view that the slowdown in the euro area at the end of  was more marked than previously thought. The April Consensus forecast for euro-area GDP growth in  had fallen to %, from .% in February. Moreover, the recent further rise in the euro could be expected to weaken the contribution of net trade to aggregate demand growth. The appreciation could provide some short-term offsetting support to consumption, through an improvement in the terms of trade, lower inflation, and possibly lower interest rates than would otherwise have prevailed.##NewPara##In Japan, the all-activity index for  Q had been revised up, which was consistent with the GDP data for that quarter. Retail sales and household spending growth had increased in  Q, although the latter was still negative. But industrial production had fallen in March, and the annual rate of growth of exports had weakened. Equity prices in Japan had not risen by as much as in other major markets, perhaps reflecting longer-term structural problems in the Japanese economy. The SARS epidemic was likely to depress activity temporarily in a number of other Asian countries.##NewPara##The recent appreciation of the euro against the dollar had perhaps been surprising, given that growth prospects for the euro area seemed to have worsened relative to the United States, and that there might now be less uncertainty affecting the dollar associated with the situation in Iraq. The Committee noted that the previous persistent strength of the dollar and the weakness of the euro had also been difficult to explain, and that its reversal should help to address the current account imbalances in the international economy, but changes in relative domestic demand would probably be needed as well.##NewPara##The Wilshire index had increased by around % since the Committee s April meeting, and although the rise in the Eurostoxx index had been less than %, German equities had risen by almost %. The FTSE All-Share index had risen by over %. In addition to the reduction in uncertainty following the war in Iraq, global equity prices had probably been helped by corporate earnings reports from the United States in the first quarter being better than expected. Because the firms quoted in the major equity price indices typically sell their products, and own assets, in foreign markets as well as their home market, any perceived improvement in one major international market tends to raise equity prices in all the major centres.##NewPara##In summary, therefore, oil and equity price movements in the past month had been supportive for international economic activity, but economic data and surveys had been more mixed. The rise in the euro against the dollar might help to correct current account imbalances.##NewTopic##Money, credit and financial market prices##NewPara##Sterling had depreciated by around  % in effective terms since the Committee s April meeting, and at the time of the meeting was roughly % below the -day average rate incorporated in the May Inflation Report central projection. The fall in sterling could not be fully explained by relative interest rate changes and appeared to have been influenced by the fall in the dollar against the euro. The most recent Consensus survey, published in early April, had shown a fall in medium-term expectations for sterling, but that might simply have reflected the decline in sterling over the previous two months, and it could not account for the further depreciation over the past month.##NewPara##Since the Committee s April meeting, sterling wholesale market forward interest rates had fallen at short and medium maturities, but had risen slightly at long maturities. The inflation expectations derived from index-linked and conventional government bond forward rates had also fallen slightly at short and medium maturities. They had risen slightly at longer maturities, but remained close to the inflation target.##NewPara##The monthly flows and annual growth rates of total secured and unsecured lending to individuals had both been strong in March, although the annualised three-month growth rates had eased since late in  for both secured and unsecured lending. The substantial rise in house prices over the past year had increased the housing equity owned by the household sector, which could support relatively high mortgage equity withdrawal for some time. The continuing robust growth of unsecured lending could signal buoyant consumption growth ahead, but it was also possible that it reflected a desire by some households to smooth the impact on consumption of adverse shocks to real disposable incomes   slower earnings growth and the short-term rise in inflation.  Notes and coin in circulation had increased strongly in April, but this partly reflected contingency measures in response to the threat of strike action at a security carrier responsible for the distribution of banknotes.##NewTopic##Demand and output##NewPara##GDP was estimated to have risen by .% in  Q, according to the preliminary ONS release. This was less than the Committee had previously expected, and materially below the underlying rate of growth in the second half of . Part of the slowdown reflected a fall in energy output, which could be attributed to unseasonably warm weather, but services growth had also slowed, to .%, and that slowdown had apparently been broadly based. Although manufacturing output had been estimated to have risen in January and February, this reflected an exceptional increase in output in the ICT sector in January. During its meeting, the Committee was informed of the March index of production data, which showed that manufacturing output had fallen by .% in March, and by .% in  Q as a whole which also reflected downward revisions to the hitherto puzzling January and February data. That could by itself imply a small downward revision to the GDP estimate. However it was not clear how this would be reflected in the expenditure counterparts.##NewPara##There were some signs that output growth might have recovered following the end of the hostilities in Iraq. The CIPS services activity and new orders balances survey had risen in April. The Q CBI manufacturing survey had suggested a fall in output, but the survey had been taken during the war in Iraq; the more recent CIPS manufacturing survey had shown a bounceback in the activity balance although both this and the new orders balance still implied a contraction.##NewPara##Indicators of consumer demand were mixed. Retail sales had risen by .% in March, which had been unexpectedly strong and implied a slight rise for the first quarter as a whole. Nevertheless, this was the weakest quarterly growth rate in retail sales for over four years. The CBI Distributive Trades survey had shown a sharp rise in the balance reporting an increase in retail sales in April, but this may have been affected by the timing of Easter. The British Retail Consortium survey had also suggested increasing retail activity, but reports from the Bank s regional Agents were more mixed. The GfK index of consumer confidence had risen in April, mainly reflecting less negative perceptions of the general economic situation, although the aggregate balance had not recovered to its January level. Overall, the month-to-month pattern of consumption growth was hard to read.##NewPara##There was evidence that housing market activity was slowing. The number of loan approvals for house purchases, seasonally adjusted, had fallen in March. The March survey by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors had shown a fall in the number of sales and a rise in the stock of unsold##NewPara##properties. The same survey had shown a percentage balance of  expecting a fall in house prices over the next three months. The relationship between this balance and the behaviour of house prices was not strong, but there was further evidence that house price inflation was slowing, perhaps more rapidly than assumed in the February Inflation Report projections. The Nationwide index had been unchanged in April, and the Halifax index had risen by only .%. It was suggested that some banks were tightening lending criteria in the buy-to-let market.##NewTopic##The labour market, prices and costs##NewPara##Employment had risen by some , in the three months to February according to the Labour Force Survey, and the rate of employment was flat. Unemployment had changed little since its trough in mid-. Total and average hours had fallen in the three months to February, continuing their recent trend. According to the CIPS survey, employment trends had improved a little in April, and the implied rate of job losses in manufacturing had slowed. Most employment intentions surveys were consistent with employment continuing to rise broadly in line with the rate of increase in the labour force in the second quarter.##NewPara##Against a background of slightly easier labour market conditions, but with the headline rate of RPI inflation some   percentage points higher than in mid-, wage pressures continued to ease. The headline increase in average earnings had fallen . percentage points to % in February. This largely reflected a strong negative contribution from bonuses, in turn mainly reflecting developments  in the financial services sector. Overall new pay settlements in the private sector showed much the same rate of increase as a year earlier, although those in the construction sector remained well above the rate of inflation. In the public sector, the Pay Review Body awards, which took effect in April, had averaged about . percentage points less than in . The Committee discussed alternative explanations for the continuing moderate level of pay settlements despite the pick-up in headline inflation and the imminent increase in National Insurance contributions. It was possible that medium- term inflation expectations were now well-anchored around the target rate, so that the recent temporary rise in inflation against a background of slower activity growth in the private sector would not result in significant upward pressure on pay. Alternatively, wage bargaining might not yet have responded to the increases in inflation and National Insurance contributions.##NewPara##RPIX had increased by .% in the twelve months to March. This was a slightly larger rise than envisaged in the February Inflation Report projections. The Budget announcement that increases in fuel duties would be deferred from April until October would reduce the rate of RPIX inflation expected between April and September by about . percentage point. Further up the supply chain, manufacturing input price inflation excluding oil had risen in March, and output price inflation had also risen, reflecting the earlier rise in petroleum prices. The recent exchange rate depreciation would put upward pressure on input and output price inflation. Surveys of financial market participants suggested that inflation was expected to peak in  and then fall back to around the target. The Consensus survey of inflation expectations from five to ten years ahead had shown a fall, to .%.##NewTopic##The May GDP growth and inflation projections##NewPara##The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections to be published in the##NewPara##On the assumption of an unchanged official repo rate of .% over the next two years, quarterly output growth was expected to be close to its trend rate throughout the forecast period. This implied a slightly lower level of GDP in the near term than was expected in February   reflecting the weaker- than-expected outturn in  Q   but a higher level in the second year of the projection.  The outlook reflected a slowdown in consumption growth, offset by continuing buoyant growth in public expenditure and a gradual increase in the contribution from net trade   due to the recovery in global demand together with an improvement in UK competitiveness associated with the lower value of sterling   and ultimately a modest pick-up in business investment. The central projection for RPIX##NewPara##inflation showed a continuing rise in the next few months followed by a fall to slightly below the target by early , as the smaller contributions of housing depreciation and petrol prices offset the initial impact of the lower exchange rate. Inflation was then expected to pick up gradually and to be around the target, and still rising, two years ahead.##NewPara##The Committee noted that the outlook for inflation two years ahead was similar to that in February. Evidence, both from overseas and from recent episodes of sharp movements in sterling, suggested that the effects of exchange rate changes on inflation expectations and on domestic prices and wages might be less than on average in the past. The Committee had taken this into account when judging the most likely impact of sterling depreciation in the May projections. In addition, the##NewPara##Committee had adjusted the judgments it had previously reached about inflationary pressures in the labour market. In particular, earnings had not so far responded to the recent temporary rise in inflation or to the rise in employee National Insurance contributions, suggesting that the impact of pay pressures could be less than previously envisaged.##NewPara##The Committee judged that the risks around the central projection for output and inflation were broadly balanced at the forecast horizon. It reduced the adjustment to the variance of the fan charts made in February to reflect the uncertainties associated with the war in Iraq, but judged that the uncertainty of economic prospects was still greater than it had been six months earlier.##NewPara##Further analysis of the Budget had confirmed the Committee s earlier judgment that the macroeconomic implications of the Budget were likely to be small. There was a modest divergence between the growth projections in the latest forecast by HM Treasury and the Committee s latest central projection, principally reflecting the former s higher view of the growth of potential output and consumption spending.##NewTopic##Other considerations##NewPara##The Reuters poll of economists suggested that economists on average attached a probability of % to a no-change decision, and % to a rate reduction. Anecdotal evidence suggested that the foreign exchange market on balance expected a reduction in repo rate, so that if such a reduction were made it was unlikely that sterling would immediately fall much further. The sharp fall in sterling in recent days appeared to have diminished money market expectations of a repo rate reduction, suggesting that market sentiment was currently finely balanced, but neither a  basis point reduction nor a no-change decision would be a major surprise.##NewTopic##The immediate policy decision##NewPara##Over the past few weeks, some of the setbacks to the recovery of world activity growth had unwound. Military action in Iraq had ended; dollar oil prices had fallen back to the levels prevailing in mid-; equity prices had recovered somewhat; and consumer confidence in the United States and the United Kingdom had also picked up. That meant that the longer-standing uncertainties once again assumed prime importance. For the world economy, these were the strength and timing of##NewPara##recovery, and the distribution of domestic demand growth between different countries, which had implications for the sustainability of growth. For the UK economy, the key uncertainty was the overall pressure of demand, reflecting the balance between the pick-up in government expenditure, and the prospective improvement in net trade and ultimately investment, and the slowdown in consumption.##NewPara##In that context, news in the latest month did not significantly change the picture, although the further decline in sterling would help support activity in the UK. The Committee s central projections in the May Inflation Report round were consistent either with a small reduction in the repo rate, or with a decision to leave the repo rate unchanged. The policy decision therefore depended in large measure on the balance of risks surrounding the projections.##NewPara##Various arguments, to which different members gave different weight, suggested that a reduction in interest rates was appropriate now. First, on the central projection, at unchanged interest rates, the level of output would be below potential throughout the forecast period, initially by a greater margin than in the February projections, and inflation would fall in  to below the target rate. Indeed, for one member, the most likely path for output lay below the central projection and directly justified a reduction in the Bank s repo rate. Second, there were downside risks to the activity projections. Consumption might be even weaker in the remainder of , given the downward influences on real disposable incomes and the possible downside risk to house price inflation. It was possible that housing market inflation and activity might slow more rapidly than expected, and that equilibrium house prices were lower than was currently assumed. And the reported weakness of exports late last year and so far in  might be indicative of a weaker underlying trade position, so that net trade might turn out weaker than projected. Moreover, looking forward, the response of exports to the fall in the exchange rate might be delayed, given the weakness of world demand and the possibility that supply might be constrained by the cumulative loss of capacity in UK export industries. Third, in the euro area, there were few signs of imminent recovery, and the strengthening in the euro would further weaken net trade there. In the United States, the weakness of the labour market suggested a downside risk to consumption going forward and there were downside risks also to investment. In the United Kingdom, the latest indicators of output in both manufacturing and services had been weaker than expected. Fourth, the rising profile for inflation at the two-year horizon could be given less weight, because there would be time for policy to respond to that prospect if the economy did indeed recover as projected. Finally, for some members the consequences in current circumstances of failing to make a necessary repo rate reduction were more serious than the consequences of making one which turned out not to be needed. In the latter event, the reduction could be reversed quickly. But if the rate was##NewPara##left unchanged when, with hindsight, a reduction would have been appropriate, it was possible that confidence might weaken further; against that background, policy might be less able to support recovery.##NewPara##There were also various arguments for leaving interest rates unchanged this month, to which different members again gave different weight. First, on the central projection, inflation was close to the target, and rising, at the forecast horizon. Second, there were a number of upside risks to this projection for inflation. The downward adjustments made to the assumed extent and pace of pass- through from sterling s depreciation to retail price inflation might have been too great. These judgments implied a favourable short-term relationship between output growth and inflation in the context of sterling depreciation. The risks to inflation were probably on the upside of this central case; for example, earnings might eventually respond, albeit with a lag, more strongly to the negative influences on real disposable income in the first half of  than was now envisaged. There might also be an upside risk to the central projection for consumption growth, since this envisaged a sharp slowdown in the remainder of . In practice, consumers might borrow more than assumed, particularly given the large amount of housing equity which would still be available as collateral. Third, sterling had fallen sharply in the days before the Committee s meeting, and stood some % below the -day average incorporated in the projections. Moreover, the FTSE All-Share index stood more than % above the average incorporated in the projections.  If sustained, both these developments implied stronger prospects for activity and higher inflation. Most members thought that it would be prudent to wait to see whether sterling stayed at its new, lower level and to assess further evidence on the evolution of business and consumer confidence after the hostilities in Iraq. Other things being equal, if sterling reversed its recent decline, and if activity continued to be weaker than expected, the case for an interest rate reduction would then be stronger. Finally, for some members, the consequences of making an unnecessary repo rate reduction now would be more serious than those of delaying inappropriately, if that rate reduction were to lead to further sharp falls in the exchange rate.##NewPara##The Governor invited members to vote on the proposition that the repo rate should be maintained at .%. Five members (the Governor, Mervyn King, Andrew Large, Charles Bean and Paul Tucker) voted in favour. Four members (Christopher Allsopp, Kate Barker, Marian Bell and Stephen Nickell) voted against, preferring a reduction in the repo rate of  basis points.##NewPara##Finally, on the occasion of Christopher Allsopp s last Committee meeting, the Governor and Mervyn King recorded their appreciation of the contribution he had made to monetary policy, both in the Committee s discussions over the past three years and previously as a member of the Bank s Court of Directors. The Treasury representative added the Chancellor s thanks for the way in which Mr Allsopp had fulfilled his responsibilities.