 I am grateful to Marco Garofalo and Jamie Lenney for their invaluable comments and assistance with the speech. My thanks also go to Thomas Belsham, Ben Broadbent, Philip Bunn, Will Dowson, Edward Hall, Christopher Jackson, Michael McLeay, Elizabeth Levett, Andre Moreira, Kate Reinold, Michael Saunders, Tom Smith, Matt Swannell, Silvana Tenreyro and Gertjan Vlieghe. ###newline###  Good morning everyone and thank you for having me here today. I am delighted to be at the Resolution Foundation, whose work on the living standards of low to middle-income citizens is both directed at a key question and thoroughly done; and whose influential status is thereby so richly deserved. Christmas time is officially upon us and, with that, the usual feeling of wanting to make sense of the year gone by. It is such a tempting desire that not even an MPC member can resist. For me, it is even more so, given this has been the first year in my new job. Furthermore, I have an extra motivation for a review, since I voted to cut Bank rate at the November and December meetings of the MPC and I therefore wanted to set out my reasons for doing so. You will forgive me then, if I take this opportunity today for a general retrospective on the past, present and future of the UK economy, in particular: Economic activities in the UK weakened during the last year. When I joined the Bank in September , a strong outlook for the world was supporting UK growth. Along with a tight labour market, domestic wage and price pressures would have sustained UK inflation around target. This is unfortunately no longer the case: Brexit uncertainties have persisted, trade wars have slowed world momentum and a margin of excess supply has re-emerged. Thus, if a Bank Rate of .% and a limited and gradual tightening over the future seemed the correct stance for monetary policy when I joined the Committee last year, I now judge a lower rate and a more protracted period of looser monetary policy to be more appropriate. I am of the view that further downside risks are lingering over our forecast in the latest MPR. Uncertainty could remain entrenched as the process of UK-EU trade negotiations unfolds; the labour market may slow down causing a longer and deeper reopening of excess supply; as a result, domestic costs pressures may not pick up and inflation may not bounce back from its near-term weakness. These risks are more concerning as the UK economy is near the effective lower bound for interest rates (ELB). There is a case to be made for a monetary policy-maker to buy some insurance against falling to the ELB, as central banks are better equipped to combat above-target inflation than below-target inflation when interest rates are close to the ELB. This is why I voted for a cut back in November and, given economic data have been broadly in line with the November forecast since then, I maintained this stance in December. ###newline###  Many pieces of evidence suggests that the UK economy is weaker than a year ago. In August , just before I joined the MPC, the Bank of England published its regular Inflation Report, now rebranded as the Monetary Policy Report. As set out in chart  the MPC, conditional on a gently rising path of Bank rate implied by market yields at the time, expected GDP to grow by an average of around  % per year over the forecast period. This was slightly above the UK s estimated potential rate of growth. Global demand was also projected to grow above its estimated potential rate over the forecast and financial conditions remained accommodative at the time. CPI inflation was .% in June  and expected to gently decline towards target (chart ). The MPC expected domestic costs to push up on inflation as external cost pressures from the effects of sterling s previous depreciation and higher energy prices waned. In order to achieve inflation at target by the end of the third year, this warranted an increase in Bank rate to .% and a gently rising path for it over the forecast horizon as implied by market yields at the time. When I joined the MPC in September , I agreed with this view. I have also agreed over the last year with the decision of maintaining the Bank rate at .% with a view to a  limited and gradual  tightening over the next years, so as to minimise the possible disruption from removing stimulus too quickly after a decade of very accommodative credit conditions. However, over this same period the actual outturns for both GDP growth and CPI inflation have been disappointing, as shown by the yellow lines in chart  and . UK GDP growth has slowed materially this year and inflation has fallen. This is due, in my view, to weaker global growth, driven by trade tensions, and the domestic impact of Brexit-related uncertainties. Let me expand on this. First, the world. The global economic outlook has weakened materially since , turning gloomier and less supportive of UK growth. This was mainly the result of heightened uncertainty combined with a slower pace of recovery in the Euro Area and, in particular, the escalation of US-China trade tensions. Chart  shows just one indicator of trade tensions, namely the trade-weighted average tariffs on bilateral trade between the US and China. The G investment swathe reported in chart  also shows a considerable slowdown: to the extent that investment is forward-looking, this is again indicative of cooling sentiment. Second, turning to the domestic economy, I would like to focus on uncertainty. Higher levels of uncertainty stemming from the Brexit process the proportion of firms that cite Brexit as an important source of uncertainty is still elevated (chart ) have weighed on the UK economy mainly through their effect on firms  investment (chart ) and productivity. Investment growth has been negative and we have been consistently below or near the bottom of the swathe of G investment growth (chart ). There is tentative evidence that uncertainty may have affected also households. The latest revisions to the savings rate suggest that saving has been higher and has been growing more than we had thought, putting consumers somewhat more in line with the cautious corporations. Indeed, the household saving ratio had been flat for the past two years at around  %, having dipped immediately after the referendum due to the squeeze on real incomes from sterling s depreciation (chart ). This was the lowest recorded household saving ratio since . Recent revisions alter both the level and trend in the saving ratio. The latest estimates put the saving ratio in  at around  %, more than a percentage point higher (chart ). Since then, the saving ratio appears now to have been on a steadily rising path over the past two years, reaching around  % by the middle of . Nonetheless, I believe the weakness in consumer confidence over the last years is suggestive of, at least, some of the saving rate increase to be due to precautionary motives. Third, the output gap. Again, when I joined the output gap was in balance and demand was expected to gently outstrip supply. This is what happened over the quarters to the beginning of , with stronger GDP growth (chart ) occurring despite low productivity; but since then, perhaps along with world trade, the output gap started to fall. Consequently, it is now estimated to be negative: while a year ago the November  Inflation Report forecast expected a positive output gap of about + % for Q, according to the Bank s latest forecast we actually have excess supply of around - % in that same quarter. This turns into excess demand only from . This is the result of the re-emergence of some spare capacity within firms, while there appears to be little spare capacity in the labour market with unemployment stable around %. Despite this, there is increasing evidence of weakening demand for labour, as reflected by a prolonged decline in vacancies over this year (chart ). Fourth, inflation has been steadily declining over the past year since its peak around % in Q, following from the fading effects of the sterling depreciation from the Brexit referendum. In less than two years, it has already halved, being now around .% and is forecasted to be below target throughout , owing to the temporary effect of falls in regulated energy and water prices. Of course, this sits in direct contradiction with the strong wage growth we have seen. Chart  shows this through the so-called factor price frontier. The axes are the deviation from trend of real product wages and real capital rental rates (that is, labour and capital compensation deflated by value added deflator). The points on the graphs are annual data from  to  de-trended by an HP filter, designed to remove any labour and capital augmenting technical change. Thus, one can think of each point as, for that year, the real labour and capital compensation the economy can support with efficiency/technology held constant. Not surprisingly then, the scatter of points is downward sloping as, for a given technology, real labour compensation can only rise if real capital compensation falls, or equivalently firms  margins are squeezed when wages are higher. I have labelled three recent points. In , following the Great Recession, we were in a period of low returns to capital and relatively higher wages. Over the next  years, margins were rebuilt at the expense of wages, at which point we started travelling back up the frontier to where we are today: squeezed margins leaving inflation low despite strong wage growth. Where does the economy go next? Further movements up the frontier will lower capital returns more and raise wages. Alternatively, firms could raise prices, although it seems difficult with competition strong, or real wages might flex downwards, perhaps as unemployment opens up, eroding the bargaining position of workers, already weaker with capital mobile. Thus, I would expect the pace of wage growth to slow. To summarise, over the past year the MPC has had to downgrade its view on the world and the UK economy repeatedly, with the initial period of softness in the forecast now extended and deepened. This has also extended to prices: we now observe and expect further weakness in inflation. This means that the UK outlook is becoming more similar to those of other advanced economies: as showed in chart , the majority of the advanced economies are experiencing inflation below %. ###newline###  The current forecast from the November  Monetary Policy Report exhibits some weakness in growth and inflation in the near-term, which then retreats in favour of a bounce back to a stronger and healthier outlook for both activities and prices. It is very much a forecast of two halves. This shape for the central projection has important consequences in terms of optimal monetary policy. Central banks  flexible inflation targeting remits are often represented by quadratic preferences that penalise deviations of inflation from target and output from potential. Applying such a set-up to the forecast, because output and inflation are so much stronger in the medium-term than in the near-term, a policymaker may seek to smooth the coming strength in demand by having it start sooner and last longer, but be smaller in any given period. This is a common result in models assuming a convex  loss function  for the policymaker, meaning that policy-makers prefer a long sequence of small deviations to a short sequence of large deviations. Of course, this result would not hold with different preferences, although I just wanted to mention this to make clear that the current central case is already consistent with some degree of loosening. I have thus no problem in agreeing with the central projection from the MPC s latest forecast, as it already supports some near-term loosening for which I have advocated. That said, I personally place a significant amount of probability on the possibility that the path for demand and, thus, inflation may turn out lower than our central expectations. One source of downside risk to demand is possible protracted uncertainty from Brexit. The recent election has clarified the Parliamentary arithmetic. However, we must remember that what matters are the perceptions of uncertainty in financial markets and by consumers and firms. Chart  suggests that the Withdrawal Agreement and Political Declaration agreed in October between the UK and the EU seem to have reduced the perceived likelihood of a no-deal Brexit markedly among firms. The current forecast reflects this as it is conditioned on a smooth transition towards a CETA-like free trade agreement between the UK and the EU. However, it normally takes quite some time to sign a trade agreement. Indeed, CETA s negotiations started in  and the agreement has been provisionally applied only since . Uncertainty may thus continue to stay entrenched for some time as the details of the negotiated provisions and what they mean for UK businesses and households will become clearer only at a later stage as our final destination emerges. I find it helpful to remember that Brexit is a process, not an event. Businesses seem to share this view according to the latest results from the Decision Maker Panel survey run in November. Just under % expected their uncertainty to persist until at least , with this proportion having increased on the month and doubled since August (chart ). The trend of Brexit-related uncertainty taking longer to resolve than previously expected is also evident if we ask firms about when they expected Brexit uncertainty to be resolved shortly after the referendum. Chart  indeed shows that, in June , % of firms expected Brexit-related uncertainty to have been resolved before the end of , while only % of firms expected their Brexit-related uncertainty to persist further into  or later. As I have already mentioned, I also note re-emergence of excess supply in the economy. In particular, I fear that this may be the first sign of a new and protracted slowdown. While it is true that the unemployment rate is very low, at around %, and indicative of a tight labour market, it is also true that this is a somewhat backward-looking measure. In contrast, if we consider indicators such as vacancies posted by companies which are more forward-looking given the time it takes to hire (skilled workers at least), we discover that they have undergone a dramatic drop over the last year (chart ). Therefore, you will not find it so surprising that I am worried that this may be signalling a forthcoming slowdown in UK employment. Another possible risk around the projections is the possible smaller effects from looser monetary policy over the past years, which would implicitly mean that the current stance is more contractionary than we have previously thought. For example, the equilibrium interest rate for the UK may have gone down by more than expected in the last years, e.g. because of the negative effects of Brexit on UK structural productivity. Similarly, heightened uncertainty may have weakened the transmission mechanisms from Bank rate cuts. For example, Bunn, Le Roux, Reinold and Surico () find that (controlling for balance sheet factors) households who are more uncertain report cutting spending by more in the face of negative income shocks, and perhaps increase by slightly less following a positive income shocks, as would be the case under a cut. ###newline###  In my view, the current data and weak near term forecast is enough to justify a cut. I would like to discuss another reason for cutting now, namely risk management. What does this mean? Risk management arguments propose that the possibility of running out of monetary headroom, e.g. by being close to the Effective Lower Bound (ELB), warrants looser monetary policy in advance of it occurring (e.g. Evans et al () and Adam and Billi ()). The idea is that an interest rate cut is a kind of insurance policy, taken out to stop growth and inflation from slowing down so much that the central banks would have nothing to do but drive the interest rate to its lower bound. Notice we would not need this insurance if a central bank s toolkit contained alternative instruments that were perfect substitutes for changing the policy rate. In those cases, the ELB never binds and thus is never a problem. In the real world however, the effects on the economy of unconventional policies such as QE are much more uncertain than those of traditional tools. There are divergent empirical estimates of their effects, and there is uncertainty about the theoretical mechanism behind those effects. The conclusion from risk management is general, as it does not rely significantly on model specifications. For example, it holds across several assumptions on the expectations formation of the different agents in the economy. If agents are forward looking, looser policy through risk management of monetary policy offsets the disinflationary effect that an expectation of reaching monetary policy limits could have. This mechanism operates through the so-called expectations channel, which arises because the possibility of a binding ELB tomorrow leads to lower expected inflation and output today and hence dictates some counteracting policy easing today. In contrast, if agents are backward looking, looser policy increases momentum, reducing the chance of reaching constraints on policy. This works through the so-called buffer stock channel, which occurs because, if inflation or output is intrinsically persistent, building up output or inflation today reduces the likelihood and severity of hitting the ELB tomorrow. Naturally, as in every insurance contract, we must ask ourselves  is it worth it?  Of course, the answer depends on: (i) how likely we think the bad outcome is, and (ii) the premium we pay for the insurance. This first item leads us to the question of whether policy-makers might overstate the probabilities of meeting the ELB, which takes one to a broader discussion of the behavioural economics of decision-making, which I leave to another time. Here I merely note that, as I have described above, I believe there is a substantial chance of inflation being quite weak and for growth to slow down more in the near-term. On the second, I think in this context the insurance might be quite cheap. Even if it turns out that the policy-maker has overstated the probability of ending up at the ELB, we can undo the stimulus by raising interest rates, given the much larger policy space we have available in terms of tighter policy. In this sense, I believe the costs of reversing policy would be quite low as expectations are unlikely to be de-anchored from looser monetary policy after so many years of  lower for longer . ###newline###  In this speech, I have tried to give you my personal assessment on where the UK economy is heading and, in particular, explain why I voted for a cut in November and December: The economic outlook for the UK has weakened during the last year: Brexit uncertainties have weighed on the economy and the world s economic outlook has deteriorated. Inflation is low and projected to Looking forward, I believe that downside risks are lingering over our forecast. In particular, Brexit uncertainties may remain entrenched. Brexit is a process not an event. In addition, I wish to reduce the probability of the economy of getting stuck at the effective lower bound, since it may be harder to get it out of that situation given our current monetary policy ammunition. Following a risk management argument, I favour a cut as insurance against this. What would cause me to change my mind? It might be that the world economy stabilises, for example if US and China were able to conclude their trade talks in a timely and positive manner and the pace of recovery in the Euro Area improved. It might also turn out the path to our future trading relationship with the EU and others is smoother, quicker and clearer than I currently expect. If the mist and dark clouds hovering over our economic future dissipate, I would expect a revival of confidence and productive economic activity, which would all else equal return us to the path of a slow and gradual rise in the Bank rate over the forecast horizon, similar to the outlook when I joined the MPC in September . ###newline###  Where   and V are the price and volume of value added: W and L are the price and volume of labour services.   is the rental cost of capital services, K and   are  abnormal  profits. Thus in principal we can think of firms as potentially renting capital goods in a competitive rental market, and then earning abnormal profits   over and above those costs in an imperfect product market. From this identity, we can decompose the log difference of Where   are the factor shares of labour, capital and profits and mfp is multifactor productivity growth (and lower case letters denote natural logs). Setting aside for the moment the issue of abnormal profits and other measurement issues surrounding the labour share (mixed income) i.e. either subsuming   into the capital share and/or assuming  ~ , we can re-write () as: The price of value added has therefore been decomposed into changes in share-weighted wages and returns to capital minus measured multifactor productivity growth (which uses as a weight on capital     ). Note these shares are the measured shares from national accounts where   is share of national income going to compensation of employees and the self-employed. Equation  tells us that, controlling for productivity, increases in the share weighted relative price of labour must be offset with falls in the share weighted relative price of capital. This relationship is illustrated in chart  (panel A) where productivity growth has been controlled for (roughly) by de-trending real labour and capital prices using a simple Hodrick-Prescott filter.