 It is an honour to have been invited to give the Ken Dixon lecture at the University of York this year on the topic of the intangible economy. It has been a pleasure to spend time on the campus talking to students as well as to spend time talking to businesses in the region today. I also want to thank Ken Dixon for his support for the University for many years. Today I will talk about a new type of economy. But one, as it turns out, that should be familiar to him. Perhaps some of you might know that Ken Dixon worked for a British confectionery company, Rowntree Mackintosh. Rowntree was founded in York in 1725 by a cocoa and chocolate vendor who sold the business to the Rowntree family in 1862. Later, in 1970, Rowntree merged with John Mackintosh & Sons. You might be familiar with some of Rowntree s brands such as: Fruit Gums, Quality Street, KitKat, Aero, After Eights, etc. The old factory was based on Haxby Road, just a 15 minutes  drive from the University. What made Rowntree particularly successful, though, was not just the production of chocolate but the value of its brands. In 1981, Ken Dixon was appointed chairman and CEO of Rowntree Mackintosh. At the time, Rowntree wasn t doing so well. Its profitability was down compared to the mid-1970s. Mr Dixon started a long-term programme to turn Rowntree around. He invested  400 million to improve manufacturing efficiency and upgrade capacity so Thus, Rowntree s success was not just due to its use of production methods and facilities but also due to the value of brands which fostered customer loyalty and generated future demand for its products. The value of Rowntree s assets was not just the buildings and machines it owned and used to produce confectionery. It was also something less tangible, the value of its brand names. Nestle recognised the value of Rowntree s brands and this is why when it took Rowntree over in 1988 the price it paid for the company exceeded tangible assets by 300% (Nielsen, 1993). This price represented more than double of Rowntree s pre-bid market capitalisation (Mather and Peasnell, 1991). What Rowntree s story tells us is that the value of companies and the value of their assets is not just what we can see. It is also what is less visible but still gives companies the ability to generate profits over many years. Nestl  today is a major corporation. It owns many factories but is also owns numerous brands and invests in both brand development and scientific research and development (R&D). For example, Nestl s factory still produces KitKats on Haxby Road but Nestl  also continues to operate a R&D centre in York developing new technologies and innovative products. Today, I will talk about how our economies have changed, the role of intangible capital and intangible investment and why that matters for understanding how firms behave differently than in the past. ###newline###  My book with Stian Westlake is titled  Capitalism without Capital  but if there is no capital how does this even make sense? In our view, to understand the world today it is important to make a distinction between tangible and intangible capital. Let me illustrate with some examples that might better explain what we mean by tangible and intangible capital and why economies have shifted towards intangible capital. In 2018, some of the world s largest companies by market capitalisation were Apple, Alphabet, Microsoft, Amazon and Tencent (Table 1). When you look at their balance sheets, they actually had very little tangible capital. For example, Microsoft only had $5bn worth of tangible capital in 2016 but $85bn worth1 of R&D capital. Alphabet (Google) has $20bn of tangible capital but $53bn of R&D capital in the same year. Why are their tangible assets so small relative to their market value? What is going on? ###newline###  Tangible assets are the values of buildings, equipment and vehicles. These are the assets that accountants can measure well. But a moment s reflection on the companies will convince you that their business relies very little on such assets. Rather, their assets are software, reputation, relationships and knowledge. That is, they are intangible assets. These assets are called, by economists, capital assets or capital for short. A capital asset is something owned by the firm that gives it a long-lived (more than a year) stream of services that it can use in production. A machine or building or vehicle is a tangible capital asset, or tangible capital. Knowledge from R&D, software, reputation and brands are also assets but intangible. So, what do the accounts say about these? Well, they say very little since the rules for reporting intangible assets are mixed. Broadly speaking, firms don t have to report them. If you do a lot of digging in company accounts you might find reported figures for spending on R&D. But even then the figure is small. That s because R&D doesn t capture a lot of their activities. The fact illustrated above, that these leading companies work with very little measured capital, explains the title of our book. Namely, business for them can be described as capitalism without capital. ###newline###  Table 2 sets out the capital we are talking about. On the left are the tangible business investments: buildings, ICT equipment like computer hardware, non-ICT equipment and vehicles. On the right are intangibles: software, databases, design, mineral exploration, R&D, and business processes, for example. These intangibles in the right column are those elements of spending that business and national accountants have been reluctant to count as investment although over the last forty years some of them have been included as such. ###newline###  Intangible assets are different than tangible assets in important ways. Intangible assets have, in our view, four distinct properties that make them different to tangible assets. These are: scalability, sunkenness, spill-overs and synergies. Let me explain these in more detail. Physical assets can only be in one place at one time. Intangible assets, by contrast, can usually be used over and over, in multiple places at the same time. For example, once you ve written the Starbucks operating manual in Chinese, an investment in organizational development, you can use it in each of the country s 1,200-plus stores. The costs of developing the app Angry Birds, an investment in software, can be spread over an arbitrarily large number of downloads. Once a business has created or acquired an intangible asset, it can make use of it again and again at relatively little cost, compared to most physical assets. If a business makes an intangible investment and later on decides it wants to back out, it s often hard to reverse the decision and try to get back the investment s cost by selling the created asset   and, in general, it s harder than in the case of a tangible asset. Economists describe these kinds of irrecoverable costs as  sunk . For example, if a logistics company goes bankrupt its creditors can sell transport vans and warehouses to pay off its outstanding debts. These assets can be put to use in different companies and/or different industries and there is often an active and liquid market that trades in them. But creditors might find it more difficult to sell intangible assets such as specialised logistics software or the firm s brand name. But spillovers don t just arise from R&D. After Apple released the iPhone, almost all smartphones started looking just like it. Apple s investments in software, design, and supply chains were adopted or imitated by its competitors as they sought to create phones like Apple s. This is an example of marketing spillovers. Perhaps less obviously, there are also spillovers in organizational design, training, and branding and marketing. Ideas and other ideas go well together. This is especially true in the field of technology. For example, the microwave oven relied on technology that was invented by the British in the Second World War as part of the radar defences pioneered to defend its shores. Intangible investments, in particular information technologies and especially networked computers and smartphones, also show synergies with tangible assets. For example, in the 1990s Walmart used computers and software to reorganize their supply chains, improves efficiency and lower prices. It used organisational and business practices in combination with new technologies to improve productivity. ###newline###  As discussed above, these intangibles are not counted in company accounts so we cannot get comprehensive data for a company. But we can for economies as a whole. To do so, we have to use some detective work to find them out, relying on various surveys (e.g. training surveys), input-output tables and the fact that national accounts include some intangibles. When we do this, what do we find? These data are drawn from the work I have done with Carol Corrado, Cecilia Jona-Lasinio and Massimiliano Iommi that have produced harmonized2 national estimates that include the United States, called the INTAN-Invest dataset3, covering the economies of 20 European countries and the United States up to 2016. Let s start with the United States (US) and Europe where Europe is the following EU countries for whom we have data: Austria (AT), Germany (DE), Denmark (DK), Spain (ES), Finland (FI), France (FR), Italy (IT), Netherlands (NL), Sweden (SE), and United Kingdom (UK). Figures 1 and 2 show data for these countries for which we have a broader set of measures on intangible investment. Figure 3 displays a wider group of countries for an extended cross-country comparison. Figure 1 shows data on the intangible and tangible investment shares of aggregate value added in Europe and the United States. As may be seen, intangible investment overtook tangible investment before the global financial crisis, during which intangible investment fell comparatively less than tangible investment. Figure 2 breaks out the investment shares for Europe versus the United States. The US intangibles share is higher and more variable than the aggregate share for our 10 European (EU) countries. In the EU countries, though intangibles are less, the intangible investment share is steadily increasing. The tangible share declines, on balance, in both areas. Figure 1 and 2 tell us that at the level of the macroeconomy intangible investment is a big deal, and that the economies of Europe and US have shifted significantly towards these type of investments over the last few decades. There is a good deal of variation across countries as shown in Figure 3 which shows the tangible and intangible investment shares of GDP (adjusted to include intangibles) for the 20 INTAN-Invest economies averaged over years before and after the global financial crisis (1996 to 2007) and (2008 to 2016) (tangible investment excludes residential structures). Intangible shares of GDP vary from 6 and 7 percent to 15 and 16 percent for the two lowest and two highest in the latter period. The US and Sweden are consistently high. Intangible shares are slightly higher after the crisis, but tangible shares are mostly down. Figure 3 is sorted left to right by the intangible share of output. This highlights that the lower intangible share economies are also the higher tangible share economies (e.g. Slovakia), and that the inclusion of intangible investment lowers the coefficient of variation4 of countries investment ratios to GDP. ###newline###  There are at least three major avenues through which I think the secular increase in intangible capital matters for the economy and policymakers. These are: the measurement of investment and capital, how intangibly intensive firms finance5 themselves, and finally implications for capacity constraints.6 Today, I d like focus on the first of these implications although I think the other implications are very important and still somewhat open questions. So, turning to measurement and without knowing anything about the economic properties of intangibles, one can right away get some feel for how they change things by looking at the accounting definitions of value added and profits. To count the output of an economy producing steel and cars you might think of adding up the production of all the steel and all the cars. That would, of course, be wrong since the value of the cars includes some of the steel. What Value Added (or GDP) does is to subtract any inputs that get used up and transformed in the process of production, these are called intermediate inputs, and this overcomes the issue of double counting. That raises the question of what is and isn t an intermediate. Steel sounds like it is in this example but suppose the car company develops software such as a navigation system, for example. This same software can be used for many cars over many years and is by no means used up. The software is, therefore, a produced capital good not an intermediate input and so it should be included in value added. The car company produces both a car and a software factory. The creation of value added requires inputs, which economists and statistical organisations typically separate into capital and labour. The following relation between value added and payments to those inputs holds as an identity: On the left we have measured nominal value added,  , where   and   are the price and volume of value added respectively. On the right are the payments to labour (L) and capital (K). For the purposes of this section let us call  , the rental cost of labour, the wage (we are ignoring taxes and subsidies and the self-employed). What about payments to capital? Let us suppose that capital potentially earns two types of returns. First, owners of capital make a return that, in a competitive market, compensates them for the risks and expenses incurred in owing capital. For example, airlines need to hire labour but also operate aircraft. In a competitive market   is the costs they have to incur to operate that capital K. Secondly, if markets are not competitive, due to barriers to entry for an airline route say, firms might make money over and above what they have to pay to operate their planes. This is the   term and we shall call this  pure profit  above production costs. We shall return to this below, but it turns out to be very hard to measure   independently. Thus for now, let us assume we measure   and   and then ascribe all the rest to the firm s tangible capital payments, this means we can write: Where we subscript   and   with a T to denote tangible capital and therefore intangibles are being excluded. Where do intangibles fit in? When we include intangibles we add two things. First, we have a new and higher value added,   : the company producing the cars is producing value added in both cars and also software. Second, we have more capital  , since there is a capital stock of software. Thus we define: It should be immediately obvious that the conventional measurements might give a misleading picture of the economy. Compare, for example, the capital shares under each measure   and   which we can write as: Both the numerator and denominator have changed in equation (5) and so when we account for intangibles it s not clear if the capital share has risen or not. However, because payments to labour ( ) remain the same and   is greater than  , it is in fact the case that the capital share rises when intangibles are included. What is not clear is how the trends in the two calculated shares in equations (4) and (5) differ over time. We now go further by digging deeper into just what  ,  and  ,  actually are. In the GDP identity we want to put capital and labour on an equal footing. Now, on the left hand side is the nominal value of output, which is a flow of value added produced over the year. What is the relevant flow of payments to labour and capital on the right hand side? It is the flow of payments to use those factors for a year.  Now, for workers this is straightforward. It is the cost of hiring them over a year. For capital, it is the equivalent: the cost of hiring capital for a year, or what is called the rental cost of capital. The reason for trying to be clear about this is that capital often has two prices and not one, a rental price and an asset price. For example, I can buy a van outright for my business with the price I pay being the asset price,  , or I can rent a van for a year, at a given and presumably lower price  . What we need is the rental price and not the asset price. There is, however, a link between the two prices derived in a now famous work by economists Robert Hall and Dale Jorgenson (1967). Suppose you are a hire car company who buys a car for a price  , and then has to decide how much to rent it out for. That rental price would have to cover at least two things. First, you could have done something else with the money such as putting it in some other project, for example, and earning a return  . Second, the rental will have to cover any change in the value over the rental period (depreciation,  ). In a well-functioning market then, the rental price has to equal these two factors so that: Consider the top equation (7) and suppose  ,   and   are stable. Mechanically, a rise in   accompanied by a rise in  . Now looking at equation (8), a rise in  ,  might be accompanied by a rise in   but it is also possible that a rise in  , especially if   has a high  , accounts for that rise so that   stays the same. We want to calculate these terms to see if   and   are changing, and to what extent the inclusion7  of intangibles changes our interpretation. We can do this using our INTAN-Invest dataset. Figure 4 shows these values calculated for the US and UK. In the case of the US we see that the capital share of national income (Panel A) has been rising over time, just slightly less than 8 percentage points between 1998-2016 when excluding intangible investment or 5 percentage points when including it. This rise in the capital share as we ve learnt could come from a number of sources: substitution from labour to capital, increasing depreciation rates or increasing returns (profits). Panel B helps shed some light on this by plotting an estimate of   over the same period for the US where intangibles are included and excluded. Interestingly, we see that the conclusions one would reach about the rise in the labour share are significantly affected by the inclusion of intangibles. When intangibles are omitted one could account for the rising capital income share as almost entirely a rise in  , that is, returns unrelated to the cost of purchasing capital goods and their depreciation. In the intangible case, however, this result is negated as these higher returns are brought down by payments to the intangible stock of capital. Turning to the UK (panels C and D), things are different. The capital income share in both cases is relatively flat and appears to have declined somewhat from the late nineties and this is similar for the measured rates of return. The flat returns depicted in Figure 4 and flat capital shares for the UK seem to be at some contrast to a growing literature8 that suggests that mark-ups have risen dramatically over past decades. So, what is going on? 9 A mark-up is defined as a good s price relative to its marginal production costs, where the marginal cost (MC) for a firm is the cost to them of creating an additional incremental unit. That cost is not easy to calculate because it depends crucially on your definition of incremental. For a conventional factory trying to accommodate week-by-week changes in demand incremental might mean, for example, the cost of extra production when workers work overtime. In the longer run, such a firm can presumably adjust both hours of work and the capacity of the factory in which case incremental would be costs of adding another team of workers on a new production line. For the software company the short-run costs of selling another unit is essentially zero since any number of users can simply download the program but in the medium term software companies typically have to rewrite versions of their software in which case the costs are not zero. Direct observation of marginal costs is therefore difficult and so the economics profession has gone about it in different ways. One method is to use company data and compare, by using statistical methods, the (proportional) change in output across a sample of firms with their (proportional) change in inputs. Economic theory tells you that such a change equals the mark-up multiplied by the share of that input in total costs and if one knows the share, again from the accounts, one can work out the mark-up. Since this lecture is supposed to be of a relatively non-technical nature I hope my audience will forgive me if I defer the discussion of the technical details of this procedure to another day. Suffice it to say a big issue in this work is the extent to which such procedures fully measure the range of costs that should be regarded as incremental. If some are left out of the analysis it might over-attribute explanatory power to those left in, leading to possibly erroneous measures of mark-ups and inferences concerning the evolution of market power. As we have seen, many intangibles are omitted from company accounts so intangibles seems like a plausible omitted variable. Doing a little more theory, a standard relation in microeconomics is that the ratio of average cost (AC) to marginal costs equals returns to scale  : where C is the total costs of production,   is the output price and Y is output. Now those costs of production are the costs of labour and capital (tangible and intangible) that are incurred in production, and in the approach above, we assumed that such costs equalled revenues. If firms are making additional revenues above production costs we can add this to equation (11) and write an equation for the mark-up over marginal production costs as: large mark-ups are reflected, other things equal, in large  , or that firms with high economies of scale  , again other things equal, will make high mark-ups. This seems consistent with the intangibles story. Ongoing intangible activities such as software development, research and process innovation can all produce considerable returns to scale. Therefore, these measured mark-ups could be reflecting a rise in the mean level of returns to scale. However, a rise large enough to account for the dramatic rise in mark-ups measured in, for example, De Loecker et al (2018) seems unlikely at the level of the macroeconomy and has not been measured to date. Other intangible activities like marketing and brand management while not increasing scale may lead to higher market and pricing power and so greater  . Indeed, a fairly large rise in   has been reported in the US by In a recent talk (Haskel, 2018), I emphasised the importance of understanding investment and highlighted its recent weakness in the UK. I argued that the recent weakness could largely be due to Brexit uncertainty but at different points since the financial crisis weak UK investment has also been a concern, see McCafferty (2014) or Cunliffe (2017). This has also been an issue in the US and the focus of recent work by Crouzet and Eberly (2018) who try to understand weak capital investment and changes to market structure in the US in the context of intangibles. Their analysis demonstrates that intangible capital, when treated as an omitted factor in production, can fill a substantial part of the apparent gap11 left by weak physical capital investment. The effect was more pronounced for more intangibly intense sectors and firms. Turning to UK data, Table 3 provides some evidence of their findings for the UK. Here the changes in the investment to capital stock by industry between the period 1998-2007 and 2010-2016 are shown on a tangible only basis and then with the inclusion of and capitalisation of intangibles. Firstly, it should be noted that all sectors seem to experience a reduction in the ratio of investment to the capital stock and even with the inclusion of intangibles. Looking at the total line, for the aggregate economy, intangibles appear to be part of the story but not all of it. More interesting results, as Crouzet and Eberly (2018) found, are at the sector level. Table 3 is sorted by intangible intensity defined as the ratio of intangible investment to total investment over the period 1998-2007. (J) have noticeably smaller changes once intangibles are included, and generally across industries the ratios fall by less with the inclusion of intangibles. This is illustrated in Figure 5 where the values nearly all sit above zero. Figure 5 also demonstrates the positive correlation between the intangible intensity of a sector and the difference in the measured slow-down of investment when you include intangibles. A notable exception is financial and insurance activities (K), a sector that has exerted a large drag on UK productivity growth, see for example Tenreyro (2018). This short analysis highlights, I think, the importance of closely monitoring intangible forms of investment, particularly in the context of productivity analysis where future productivity gains in advanced economies are likely to be increasingly driven by intangible investment. ###newline###  Today, I have outlined the long term trend away from an economy of tangible capital to one of intangible capital and how the categories and characteristics of intangible capital differ from tangible capital. It is a pleasure to have done so here in York where Rowntree used both tangible and intangible assets to successfully sell its products. It is incumbent on economists to incorporate and understand this trend and assess whether our current models can capture the implications. I have focused on and outlined some of the challenges to measurement and highlighted where the omission of the measurement of intangible capital plays a role in active debates amongst policy makers concerning trends in margins, mark-ups, scale and investment. I would reiterate that measurement is not the only channel we as policymakers need to pay close attention to. For example, in my discussion of mark-ups I decomposed the mark-up into a scale component and a profit component, both are variables that could interact with and change the dynamics of output, wages and inflation. I also believe that through its intangible nature there are implications for the financing of business investment, particularly for new firms. Firms may have to shift more to equity financing and venture capital, while lenders may rely more on earnings-based loan covenants and less on collateral. There are implications for financial stability and monetary policy transmission but the overall balance of direction is not clear. This is an area for Finally, let me thank you gain for your hospitality and Ken Dixon for supporting this lecture series.