 I would like to thank Alina Barnett, Adrian Chiu and David Barkshire for research assistance, and I am also grateful for helpful comments from other colleagues, especially Spencer Dale, Gabor Pinter, Matt Waldron and Martin Weale. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. ###newline###  The economy is growing. It s hard to say exactly how fast it s growing. Official third-quarter GDP estimates aren t published for another month and will be subject to significant revision for some time afterwards. But what output data we do have for the quarter are strong1. And if you take survey readings as a guide   the red line in Chart 1 is a weighted average of the sectoral CIPS surveys   they suggest output in the market sector of the economy is expanding at an annualised rate of 5% or so. This may be an over-estimate. But the economy has clearly picked up significantly faster than the majority of forecasts (including those of the MPC) made last year2. Some commentators have wondered how it can have done so. Citing high debt levels in the private sector and ongoing fiscal contraction in the public sector, they have also expressed doubts it can continue. But these have not proved insuperable barriers to growth in the past. The economy has grown through similar-sized reductions in government borrowing before now3. And the clear pattern after other financial crises, here and elsewhere, is that economies turn up while private-sector debt ratios are still falling4. Some acceleration in activity was always likely in 2013. Underlying growth in 2012 was masked by exceptional contractions in construction and oil output that were unlikely to be repeated. More importantly, the various central bank interventions through the course of last year were followed by a big decline in risk premia and funding costs across the advanced economies, not least for their banks (Chart 2). This wasn t exactly the same thing as a cut in official interest rates. But it nonetheless amounted to a sharp easing in financial conditions, one that might have been expected   after the usual lag of around a year   to have boosted real activity, here and in other parts of the developed world. It is easy to be wise after the event. As I explained in a speech earlier this year, forecasters generally anticipate only around a third of changes in economic growth one year ahead, and we can be no more confident that the recovery can continue smoothly at this rate than in the view that it would never arrive. The survey readings in Chart 1 are near their series highs and, even if only from a statistical perspective, it would be reasonable to expect a degree of moderation from here. Domestic deleveraging pressures may not be enough to keep the economy in permanent stagnation but they nonetheless provide a headwind to growth. While they may have diminished, the underlying imbalances in the euro area, and the risks they entail, have not gone away. And if the path of actual output is inevitably unpredictable, we are also facing an unusually uncertain outlook for potential output   the capacity of the economy to meet demand without generating inflationary pressure. That capacity depends centrally on how productivity evolves. And because productivity growth has been unusually poor, even allowing for the weakness of economic activity, it is hard to be sure how it will behave as the economy recovers. (You can see the scale of the puzzle in Chart 3, which plots five-year average growth rates in GDP and employment. I included the same graph in a speech on productivity last year.) This is a central feature   perhaps the central feature   of the economic landscape in the UK and it is in this light, I will argue, that we should see the policy of  conditional guidance  recently introduced by the MPC. This policy has a number of virtues, not least the reassurance to investing businesses that monetary policy will not rise until economic recovery has become firmly entrenched. What I want to do in this speech, specifically, is to explain why it is appropriate to measure that progress with the rate of unemployment: conditioning policy on the labour market is the natural response to higher uncertainty about the path of potential output. ###newline###  Not everyone is afflicted with such doubts. Since touching on the subject in a speech last year, I ve read a number of pieces arguing that the solution to the productivity puzzle is  simple : it s  obviously  the result either of labour hoarding by firms and/or greater flexibility in pay. And because these are just cyclical phenomena, it must follow that productivity will rise, along with aggregate demand, as the economy recovers. These factors help to explain why measured productivity is, in general, cyclical. They have almost certainly been at work in recent years. Some employees will have been retained in expectation of a pick-up in orders in the future, rather than to meet any today. Relative to the 1970s and 1980s, at least, real pay does indeed look more flexible than in the previous downturns. But it s a real stretch, on any closer examination, to explain the divergence in Chart 3 using these things alone7. If, more generally,  aggregate demand  alone is responsible for weak growth it s hard to explain why domestic cost and price growth has also been much stronger, relative to output, than in the past. And, as I suggested last year, there are also positive indications that the economy has been slow to adapt to significant shifts in relative economic conditions, across different sectors and firms. This will have reduced effective supply. What I want to do now is to present a little more evidence for this channel.  I will then qualify it by admitting that, even to the extent it matters over the recent past, it may not tell us much about how productivity behaves in future. Like Roman Gaul the evidence is in three parts: a general point about the importance of cross-firm reallocations in the economy, a bit on what relative price changes tell us and some results on the behaviour of investment. The first and third come from work led by colleagues here at the Bank8. Look first at Chart 4. This uses individual firm-level responses to the ONS surveys of output and employment to break down changes in aggregate productivity into various component parts   in dark blue, those that occur within individual firms; the effect of moving employment across existing firms, from the less to the more productive (light blue); the contribution of new entrants (green) and that of firm exits (in black). There are a few interesting things here. First, firms leaving the population are on average less productive than others (that s why the black bars are positive). This is why the surprisingly low level of firm exits in and since the last recession may not be an unmitigated good. Second, in the (brief) period before the financial crisis, only a minority of productivity growth took place within existing firms. Most was due to reallocation of one sort or another, principally across the existing population of companies. Third, that reallocation has since slowed down. This is hardly conclusive evidence. For one thing, the dark blue bars too have fallen significantly since the crisis, so it s not as if slower reallocation, measured this way, is the only thing going on. Also, this is just a mechanical, accounting breakdown: we can t be sure that we can legitimately imagine changes in one set of bars without affecting the others. And the sample only covers a few years. Ideally, one would want to know how the same breakdown looked in earlier recessions. The other two pieces of evidence do cover earlier recessions. As I explained a year ago, shifts in relative demand won t affect aggregate productivity as long as productive resources move seamlessly in response. But if that does occur, relative prices won t have to change either: it s the fact that capital can move from one sector or firm to another that keeps marginal costs (and therefore prices) stable in the face of relative demand shifts. That s why Chart 5 is interesting. It plots the variance of real prices, across 29 sectors of the economy, compared with their pre-crisis trends.9 And it shows a significant increase in the dispersion since the crisis. This suggests marginal costs too have become more dispersed. To the extent this is due to (relative) demand shocks, it would necessarily imply a misallocation of resources and a loss of aggregate productivity. Indeed, one can have a go at translating the one into the other (see note 2 in the Appendix): to a first order approximation, the loss in productivity would be around a half the variance in prices. Taken at face value, therefore, Chart 5 suggests that, compared with the pre-crisis period, slow reallocation might have knocked up 3%-4% off aggregate productivity10. The suggestion here is that the crisis may have impaired the economy s ability to channel finance away from areas where demand and profits have fallen and towards those where they ve both risen. The third piece of evidence, presented in Table 1, gets at this more directly. Using three separate datasets for the UK, and one for the United States, it presents results of firm and industry-level regressions of investment on profitability. It shows that the two were positively related in the pre-crisis period UK data, including in prior recessions, but not in the more recent period. The same has apparently not happened in the United States where, as it happens, productivity growth has been much less weak than in this country. ###newline###  I find this evidence reasonably persuasive.  I also think it s significant that our experience is far from unique: it is generally the case that, during and immediately after big financial crises, and even allowing for the depth of the downturns, productivity growth is lower than in other recessions. It seems only reasonable to infer that this might have something to do with the performance of the financial system specifically.  We cannot hope to understand this effect if we stick rigidly to a view of the world in which variations in output are caused only, always and everywhere, by changes in  aggregate demand , treatable with the traditional tools of monetary and fiscal policy. But that doesn t mean this is the only thing going on   it s surely likely that demand and supply-side factors have both contributed to weak productivity growth   or that one can be at all confident about the precise scale of these various effects. And even if one could be, I m not sure whether it would help much in forecasting how productivity behaves over the future. Suppose there were a sudden (and independent) improvement in demand. To the extent it s been weak only because of labour hoarding, or more flexible pay, productivity would automatically improve11. But operating profits in the financial sector would also grow, as would the cash-flow and confidence of self-financed small businesses. So, although it might take a little longer, one should probably expect these re-allocative frictions, such as they are, to dissipate as well.12 Either way, effective supply would, to a degree, react  endogenously  to demand13. That s why I m happy with the MPC s central forecast, in the latest Inflation Report, that foresees an acceleration in productivity   and a correspondingly gentle decline in the rate of unemployment   as the economy recovers. (On that note, it s worth pointing out that, even after growth of around 2% in the number of private-sector jobs over the past year   a rate that the latest surveys suggest we might reasonably expect to be maintained for a while yet (Chart 6)   the rate of unemployment has fallen by only 0.3% points. This is because employment in the public sector is still falling and, more importantly, the active workforce is growing   see Chart 714). My main reaction to all this, however, is to feel very cautious about the likelihood of any particular path for potential output. There is a close connection between our ability to understand the past and the confidence we should allow ourselves about our predictions of the future. If we don t really have a good explanation for the way something has behaved in recent experience we should surely be less confident about our ability to forecast it over the future. And the connection runs both ways: something that is obvious after the event should probably have been forecastable before the fact. So perhaps I can end this section with Chart 8, which plots the difference between out-turns and prior forecasts of output and employment growth. The data are from the Treasury s survey of professional forecasters and cover predictions made by all the main UK forecasters since 2003. There is a clear divide in the performance around the time of the financial crisis. In normal times, there is no obvious bias in forecasting employment once you take account of any error in forecasting GDP (the regression line goes close to the origin). But there is a clear bias after the crisis: employment has been consistently stronger than expected, given GDP. Put another way, something unusual has happened to productivity. And it would in my view be brave, not to say heroic, wholly to ignore the fact. ###newline###  Now you may or may not buy any of this. And perhaps the best way to approach the question of how policy should behave when there is uncertainty about potential output is to start with the case where there is none. We will do so imagining an economy in which inflation is determined by the underlying pressure on resources, in particular employment, and where this in turn depends, albeit with something of a delay, on aggregate demand relative to underlying productivity (the  output gap ). The faster demand grows, relative to productivity, the greater the demand for employment from firms and the greater the upward pressure on wages and inflation. If the  output gap  declines, whether because demand is weak or supply is strong, employment and inflation are more likely to fall. When there is no uncertainty about supply growth   when the only thing giving rise to unpredicted changes in output are shocks to  aggregate demand    setting monetary policy is reasonably straightforward. If output growth strengthens you immediately tighten policy: you know, without having to wait for confirmation from the labour market, that stronger growth will lead to more pressure on resources and inflation. So you re better off responding straightaway. Conversely, and because it necessarily means employment and then inflation will subsequently fall, weaker output growth leads you immediately to loosen policy15. Perhaps this abstract world sounds too good to be true.  But I think it s not a bad description of those halcyon, pre-crisis days known as the  Great Stability . After years of steady growth and inflation, it was probably reasonable to conclude that the economy s productive potential was chugging along, at a steady rate of 2 % or so, in the background. Certainly that s what most people assumed. And consistent with that assumption, UK monetary policy responded sensitively, immediately and (more or less) uniquely to actual growth in output. You can see this in Chart 9.  The red line is the same composite CIPS index plotted in Chart 1.  It s a timely and (as a 3-month moving average) a relatively smooth indicator of private-sector output growth.  Rather than using actual changes in interest rates, which is a more jumpy series, the blue line plots the average vote on official interest rates on the MPC. The two are closely correlated.  The reason, I believe, is that every acceleration in output was thought to represent a rise in output gap, signalling higher inflation risks, every drop in growth the opposite. Unfortunately, however, you can t make that deduction when supply, not just demand, is unpredictable. Suppose the policy maker sees strong growth. This may turn out to require extra resources, including higher employment, in which case it is likely to add to inflationary pressure. But it may not: it s also possible the upturn is being accompanied by faster productivity growth, in which case it would be wrong to tighten policy. What, under these circumstances, should one do? The answer is to respond less sensitively to output and more to developments in the labour market, even if you have to wait for a while to see them. Changes in unemployment are now a more reliable measure of what s happening to the degree of slack in the economy than economic growth alone. And what the policy maker loses in response time he or she makes up in a greater degree of clarity about the degree of spare capacity. The optimal policy   the relative weight one puts on unemployment relative to output growth   trades off one against the other. I made this point briefly   that uncertainty about productivity means we should pay more attention to developments in the labour market   in a speech last year. The result of a more formal representation, in a simple economic model16, is in Chart 10. Against the variability of supply (relative to that of demand), on the horizontal axis, it plots the weights optimal policy should put on output growth and unemployment17. As one might expect, there is no point in paying any attention to unemployment when there are only demand shocks. Because it responds only slowly, and with some noise, to swings in demand, you might as well respond as soon as you see those in the output data. But as you become less confident about future supply, the unemployment data become more informative. This, in my view, is a key rationale for conditioning policy on the rate of unemployment, as we have in our policy announcement in August. Reasonable people can disagree about how to interpret changes in output growth. Given the experience of the past few years, and the apparent breakdown in the relationship between output growth, on the one hand, and employment and inflation on the other, that s only to be expected. But what we can say, with a greater degree of confidence, is that it would be appropriate to consider withdrawing some of the monetary easing in place if we see a marked decline in the single most reliable (albeit lagged) measure of spare capacity, namely the rate of unemployment. ###newline###  It is common for people to complain that the predecessors (and their successors too) had it easier. One example of this, in the world of central banking, is the often-heard line that the job of monetary policy is harder because the economic outlook is  particularly uncertain . As an outside observer, in my last job, I used to take this with a pinch of salt: after all, when has one ever heard the opposite ( happily, we can report that the outlook is unusually certain )? True to type, however, and now that I m on the other side, that s exactly what I m trying to argue here: that the world is, indeed,  particularly uncertain    or, at least, that we have to be more cautious about a key assumption, the rate of growth of the economy s productive potential, that we used to take somewhat for granted. The right response to this uncertainty is to attach less weight to output growth itself and more to direct indicators of economic slack, even if these emerge only with a delay. That judgement is central to the policy of  conditional guidance . For the most part, the policy has been well understood. But it has, in some quarters, been mistaken as a commitment to keep policy unchanged for a particular period of time, come what may. Some press reports, for example, have argued that, because unemployment could fall faster than in central projection in the latest Inflation Report, the MPC might be  forced  to consider an earlier rise in interest rates than it has  promised . I have to say that I find this argument decidedly odd. There is no promise unconditionally to keep interest rates fixed for a particular length of time. What we have pledged to do   and the clue is in the word  conditional    is to examine the case for a withdrawal of monetary stimulus only after a significant fall in unemployment and as long as the inflation and financial stability  knock-outs  have not been breached. That is only reasonable. Interest rates, like any other policy instrument, are not an end in themselves: they are a means to an end. If unemployment falls faster than we re expecting either because productivity does less well than in our central projection, or because demand grows more strongly, it would be right to ask whether we should think about withdrawing some of the monetary stimulus currently in place. Nor would we be displeased with such an outcome (what s not to like about lower unemployment?). If unemployment declines more slowly it would be right to leave the monetary stance unchanged for that much longer. This is something the MPC, along with the rest of the world, will reassess over time; in the August Inflation Report we viewed these two possibilities as equally likely. But then that s the thing about something that s uncertain: it could go either way. Svensson, L. and M. Woodford (2003), "Indicator variables for optimal policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 50(3), pages 691-720, April.