 I would like to thank Alina Barnett and Adrian Chiu for research assistance and I am also grateful for helpful comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. In my economics textbook is says the following:  Cuts in interest rates lower the cost of borrowing which results in higher investment and the purchase of consumer durables . crisis, and is now firmly in negative territory (Chart ). Yet on a recent Agency visit many themselves (not including depreciation) over a period of six years   equivalent to an expected net rate of 
return of around %. Now, it seems, the payback period has shortened to around four years, a required net rate of return of %. This is hardly a large sample. And it s quite possible that managers  opinions about hurdle rates aren t worth much anyway. Perhaps finance directors know that managers tend to over-estimate profitability and adjust their targets accordingly. But, for what it s worth, these numbers are in the range of average returns on existing capital for non-financial firms (Chart  again). More importantly   because this isn t just anecdotal   you also get the impression of an unusually wide spread between risky and risk-free yields from securities markets. The green line in Chart  is the ratio of profits to assets, the latter valued at market prices, for UK-quoted companies. Instead of declining, that measure of yield has actually gone up since the recession, and even in absolute terms (let alone relative to risk-free rates) is currently more than bp higher than it was during the three years leading up to the crisis. The overall cost of capital in securities markets is this rate plus the expected long-run growth rate of corporate earnings. We don t have data for these expectations, but if, instead, we use Consensus forecasts for long-run UK GDP growth, we get the dotted red line. One thing that has probably helped to push up required returns is a contraction in the supply of credit. Like Bank rate, interest rates on new bank loans have declined (Chart ). But this ignores the impact of non-price factors, including outright rationing of loans.  As we shall see below, this implies that the true, effective cost of credit is materially higher than the quoted interest rate on new lending. That said, what s striking about Chart  is that the companies to which it applies are not, by definition, restricted to raising money from banks. They can also sell securities. Yet their cost of finance has apparently risen as well. What I will suggest in this speech, therefore, is that, even if the origins of our present predicament lie in the banking crisis of , and in the subsequent need to repair banks  balance sheets, we are now suffering from a more general rise in the premium demanded for all risky investments, however they re financed. In fact, I will argue, the pattern in Chart  is exactly what you d expect if investors  fears about downside risks in particular began to intensify   if their impression of  the worst that could happen  gets that much worse (what I have in mind here is the possibility of extreme outcomes in the euro area). And the investments most vulnerable to such a shift   where you d expect to find the sharpest increase in required returns   are those that have some element of irreversibility. This will include many projects (spending on intangibles, for example) that are necessary to improve productivity. Thus high risk premia may be inhibiting not just demand but the economy s supply capacity as well. Here s the plan: I will start with some remarks about credit rationing, providing some evidence that bank debt is more expensive than interest rates alone would imply; we then turn to a simple model of asset pricing that allows for  rare disasters    as we shall see, small increases in the perceived likelihood of extreme outcomes can have powerful effects on yields, even if they re still very unlikely to occur; I will then explain why these effects are amplified in the case of sunk-cost projects and why, therefore, these downside risks may be important for productivity. ###newline###  If the quoted interest rate were the true marginal price of debt, then the credit supply curve facing an individual borrower would be a flat line ( S  in Chart ). It would then make sense to carry out all investment projects   ranked according to prospective return along the  D  line   until the marginal project that yields the same as this interest rate. Last week, however, my morning newspaper carried an interesting report. It said that a promise by a newly launched supermarket bank to undercut rivals  loan deals had been criticised by a watchdog  because it could damage borrowers  credit ratings . The reason given was that lenders consider the number of loan applications as an indicator of individual credit risk. So an additional application could increase the cost of other debts, now or in the future. And instead of the low, flat supply curve in Chart , the individual borrower apparently faces a higher, upward sloping line (Sc). I have heard similar things from some businesses. Their banks may be happy to roll over existing loan deals at relatively low interest rates, but only   so these managers believe   if the company s financial health is maintained. This might mean keeping debt within certain limits. It might mean holding some minimum amount of cash. But the effect is the same: credit supply for new investments is harder to come by and the true marginal cost of debt   the amount firms are actually willing to pay in order to reduce it   is higher than the interest rate. Note that, facing such a curve, borrowers would have an incentive to cut spending   possibly to levels below their current income   in order to repair balance sheets. Indeed they might effectively be forced to do so. So if the cost line shifts upwards (to Sc ) as depicted in the Chart    a crude characterisation of what a credit tightening entails   you d expect to see weaker investment, a higher rate of return on marginal projects and larger surpluses in the non-financial economy. We are all aware of the complaints from small business about the availability of credit. There are also clear signs of rationing in mortgage markets. Chart  shows the balance on New Buyer Enquiries in the RICS housing-market survey, an indicator of the desire to move house (and the associated demand for mortgage debt) against the number of transactions three quarters later. Until the crisis, the RICS balance predicted pretty well movements in both mortgage approvals and the number of transactions: activity in the housing market looked to be demand driven. That relationship broke down decisively after , however. Buyer interest rose sharply towards the end of that year, as quoted mortgage interest began to fall. But activity went in the opposite direction, to levels consistent with average tenure times well over  years. This suggests that the market was   and continues to be   constrained not by a lack of demand but a contraction in the supply of finance. This evidence tells us there is rationing, but not what it s worth in interest-rate terms (i.e. the rate rationed borrowers would actually be prepared to pay for debt). But the behaviour of larger firms, most of which have the option of selling bonds and equities, and are not limited to bank debt, suggests the effect is material. Chart  plots the proportion of their external finance accounted for by securities issuance as opposed to new loans from banks. The red line plots the difference in their cost (the gap between the earnings yield and quoted interest rates). It s drawn on an inverted scale, so a drop means bank debt is, on the face of it, getting relatively cheaper. All else equal, you would expect that to encourage a shift towards bank finance and, more generally, the two lines to move together over time. That looks roughly true prior to the financial crisis. But it s clearly not the case since: despite the steep fall in interest rates, both in absolute terms and, to a greater extent, relative to yields on other forms of finance, firms have been shifting away from bank debt (you can see this too in the data for the aggregate non-financial corporate sector in Chart ). If firms that have the option are choosing to pay down bank debt by issuing securities that are, apparently, much more expensive, this indicates that the interest rate significantly understates the true cost of the debt. Chart  suggests the effect may be worth several percentage points. ###newline###  One should hardly be surprised, after a once-in-a-century banking crisis, to observe shortages of credit. Whether they re sufficient to explain the continuing weakness of output and private-sector productivity growth is another question, however. One of the things that struck me about the companies reporting higher hurdle rates is that only a minority also said they had problems with meeting banking obligations. More significantly, we know that most business investment is done by large firms, companies that are generally able (if they so choose) to issue securities and bypass the banking system. Yet that category of spending also fell very sharply after the crisis. And, as we ve already seen, even if those firms were indeed substituting securities finance for bank debt, they were doing so at a significantly higher cost than before the downturn   this despite a sharp fall in risk-free interest rates. All this suggests that, even if the crisis originated in the banking system there is now a higher hurdle for risky investment   including, or even especially (I will later argue) the sorts of projects needed to improve productivity   on a more general basis. Specifically, what seems to fit best the facts in Chart  is not some symmetric, two-sided increase in risk but a rise in the perceived probability of an extremely bad economic outcome. Not surprisingly these effects become more apparent as the perceived likelihood of a (still) rare disaster goes up. Chart (a) simulates such an increase. It assumes that the  disaster , were it to occur, is big enough to reduce GDP by an average of % and that the probability of its occurring is initially thought to be %. These numbers are somewhat arbitrary and you get similar results if you were to assume a slightly higher initial probability but a smaller hit to GDP.  The point of the simulation is that, from whatever starting level, the perceived likelihood of an extreme, discrete outcome need only rise a little to have significant effects on markets. As simulated here, a rise of % points or so in the perceived likelihood is sufficient to push risk-free interest rates below zero while at the same time increasing the expected return on equity (i.e. the hurdle rate for risky investments). To my mind, Chart (a) resembles quite closely the pattern of yields we ve actually seen in financial markets in recent years. In principle, there are other ways you could account for this pattern, Lower expectations of long-run growth, partly via the response of easier monetary policy, will have reduced yields on all assets. Higher uncertainty (of the conventional, two-sided sort) would raise the risk premium. But it s hard to see how these effects can be big enough to explain the data. Judging by the sensitivity in Chart (b), long-run growth expectations would have to have dropped several percentage points for that alone to account for the decline in risk-free interest rates. Yet, as measured by consensus forecasts for -year-ahead GDP, those long-run expectations have declined only slightly (Chart ). Similarly, the rises in pure (two-sided) uncertainty you need to account for the actual widening in the risk premium look implausibly large (Chart (c))   % points or more, compared with a standard deviation of actual GDP growth that, in the long run of historical data (Chart ), has never got close to that. So it looks to me as though a higher downward-skew in the distribution of outcomes   a higher risk of a rare but very bad economic shock   does the better job of explaining how financial markets have behaved. And we have, in the shape of the on-going financial crisis and the possibility of serious disruption in the euro area, a very plausible candidate for such a risk. That is not to say we know either what form the worst-case outcome would take, or what probability to attach to it. I m not sure it s even knowable. That s why the MPC decided last autumn explicitly to exclude these risks from its fancharts. But there is less doubt that it could have serious implications for the UK or that it s already come to have a very significant impact on financial markets. Chart  plots the rolling correlation between daily movements in the UK equity prices and the spread between euro-periphery and German government bond yields. Pretty much unrelated prior to the financial crisis, the two series have since been tightly correlated. ###newline###  The first is brief and involves the distinction between credit supply and credit demand. What I ve argued so far is that, although UK bank deleveraging remains important   it s still adding to financing costs for borrowers dependent on the banks   the evidence suggests that an independent hurdle has emerged in the form of higher risk premia, plausibly associated with events in the euro area. This is raising the bar for all investments, including those financed in securities markets. Were the worst outcomes to occur, however, they would clearly be transmitted via, and amplified by, the banking system. UK banks have significant exposure to the rest of Europe. And, like those for the wider market, banks  funding costs have become much more sensitive to movements in euro-area sovereign spreads. This suggests that pressures on UK banks emanate partly from precisely the same risks that are affecting non-financial companies. This makes it harder to distinguish the influences of  credit supply  and  credit demand . The second point concerns the distinction between reversible and irreversible investments. The model simulations above applied to the first, investments that a firm could exit costlessly. If it involved physical plant, for example, then the assumption would be that firms could lease such equipment or re-sell it in second-hand markets. In reality, many investments are not like that: they involve sunk costs. Big FDI projects, in-firm training, R&D, the adoption of new technologies, even simple managerial reorganisations   these are all things that can improve productivity but have risky returns and cannot be easily reversed after the event. This matters because economists have long recognised that sunk-cost investments are particularly vulnerable to increases in uncertainty, fears of bad outcomes in particular. If things turn out well, you can always go ahead with the project when they do so; but if things turn out badly, a sunk-cost investment will have proved a big mistake. So if the risk of a rare but very bad event grows   if the worst-case scenario suddenly looks that much worse   you have a powerful incentive to delay such projects: the  option value  of waiting goes up and the required rate of return along with it. Thus the equivalent to Chart (a), which plotted the sensitivity of expected returns to  disaster  risk, would look like Chart , and the effects of such risks on risky investment is thereby amplified. How important is this effect? Many intangible investments are, by their nature, hard to measure, and not included in conventional statistics on business investment. But Marrano and Haskel () estimated that, in , and at least in gross terms, they were the same size, both worth % of GDP. And while not all intangible investment is irreversible, one suspects that, with a scarcer supply of leasing finance (Chart ), even some physical investments are harder to exit than before the crisis. ###newline###  In a speech last year, I suggested that low capital mobility had contributed to weak growth of productivity and output. Following big shifts in relative prices, most obviously between traded and non-traded output, it was likely that some activities had become much more profitable (all else equal), others less so. Failure to move resources from one to the other would lower aggregate productivity. I also suggested that low capital mobility was connected with deleveraging: banks were  forbearing  on existing finance for activities that had become unprofitable while failing to fund the newly profitable projects. But the truth is that, although there are still signs of tight credit, finance looks expensive even for firms that can bypass the banks. Together with the big drop in risk-free interest rates this suggests that the distribution of economic outcomes driving financial markets has a marked downwards skew   that fears have increased of a rare but bad economic outcome. Such an event could remain very unlikely yet, if severe enough, still have a powerfully inhibiting effect on new investment projects, particularly those that are difficult to exit. As the May Inflation Report put it  the possibility of extreme outcomes crystallising [in the euro area] will continue to weigh on UK activity...even if those outcomes do not actually occur  (my emphasis). What I m arguing in this piece is that these heightened fears may already have been affecting the growth of UK activity, investment and productivity for some time. It would be nice to think that these worries are unfounded   that  the only thing we should fear , to quote Roosevelt,  is fear itself . Unfortunately, I doubt that s the case. Markets and businesses possess  animal spirits  and can over-react to events. They may have done so again. But there s probably a premium on risky investments because there is genuine economic risk. I don t mean, by any of this, to add to the prevailing gloom. We should remember that we have been through similar episodes before   as recently as the mid-s, risk premia rose to levels that were probably higher than they are now (I don t think it s a coincidence that productivity growth also slowed sharply at that time). Equity prices are still higher than last summer s lows, investment is still happening and, thanks in part to the ECB s LTRO operations, banks have managed to attract far more funding in the first few months of  than they did a year ago. In addition, one important implication of this thesis is that, if fears of downside risks were to recede, this could have pretty powerful effects on output   potential as well as actual   in a positive direction. Nor is domestic policy powerless to affect things in the interim. Indeed, I strongly believe that the dramatic easing in monetary policy after , here and in other parts of the world, was crucial in helping to prevent what might have been a much deeper downturn. And, were the (still unlikely) worst-case risks in the euro area actually to be realised, then our own monetary policy would again play its part in mitigating the impact. But, to some extent at least, that expectation is already there: markets should, and presumably do, know that, because such a downturn would threaten to push inflation to dangerously low levels, it would also be met with further monetary easing. To a degree, therefore, that response is already factored into market yields and the prevailing cost of capital. One should therefore recognise that, while they are both necessary and effective, these domestic interventions have their limits. It remains the case that, for the time being at least, the most important policy decisions affecting the UK are being taken in other parts of the continent.