 This paper examines the causes and consequences of changes in the incidence of entrepreneurship in the UK. Self-employment as a proportion of total employment is high by international standards in the United Kingdom, but the share has fluctuated over time. We examine the time series movements in self-employment, which are principally driven by financial liberalisation and changes in taxation rules, especially as they relate to the construction sector which is the dominant sector. We document that the median earnings of the self-employed is less than for employees. We show that in comparison with employees the self-employed are more likely to be male; immigrants; work in construction or financial activities; hold an apprenticeship; work in London; work long hours; have high levels of job satisfaction and  happiness.  Consistent with the existence of capital constraints on potential and actual entrepreneurs, the estimates imply that the probability of self-employment depends positively upon whether the individual ever received  an inheritance  or gift. Evidence is also found that rising house prices have increased the self- employment rate. There appears to be no evidence that changes in self- employment are correlated with changes in real GDP, nor national happiness. This paper examines the causes and consequences of changes in the incidence of entrepreneurship in the United Kingdom. But an initial question must be: how many entrepreneurs are there? The answer is not straightforward. There are several ways of  counting  them.  The simplest is to count the number of self-employed workers, but even that is difficult.  We could   count those that self report their employment status, such as in the Labour Force Survey (LFS).1     Or we could count the number of individuals who declare self-employment income for taxation purposes. It would be useful to do both and see if the numbers equate. They do not. In fact, the number of people who declare taxable income from self-employment in the United Kingdom is roughly 50% greater than the number that say they are self-employed. Her Majesty s Revenue and Customs (HMRC) records just over 4.5 million individuals declaring some income from self- employment in 2003/4, but the LFS records just over 3 million self-employed workers. This is not that surprising. It is clear that many individuals have more than one job, so the number of individuals reporting self-employed earnings for taxation purposes should be expected to be higher than the number that say they are self-employed. It is also likely that in some instances individuals will struggle to identify whether they are principally an employee or self-employed. They could base their decision on hours worked or income earned. Or it could reflect the timing  of  survey  responses. A classic example is that of a free-lancing actor. Fifty-one weeks of the year they work for a wage waiting tables in a restaurant. But by the survey reference week they have quit their job as a waiter and they star in a film for which they are paid one hundred times the wages they earned as a waiter over the previous fifty one weeks. Are they self-employed or employed? In this paper we focus primarily on the characteristics of the self-employed and how self- employment has changed over time, principally in the United Kingdom, using the LFS. Unfortunately these data do not record self-employed earnings. Consequently, we also make use of the HMRC data as well as information from various Family Resources Surveys to  compare  earnings of the self-employed with the wages and salaries earned by employees. The most entrepreneurial individuals in the UK, such as Lakshmi Mittal, Sir Richard  Branson and Sir Alan Sugar, are generally not included in our surveys. A very small number of the most entrepreneurial individuals are very important both in terms of wealth and job creation. What distinguishes them from everyone else? As far as we can, with the limited data available, we examine their characteristics too. In what follows we first consider time series trends in self-employment in the UK and elsewhere. Second, we compare the earnings of the self-employed with those of wage and salary workers.  Third, we examine the characteristics of the self-employed.   Fourth we perform a series   of econometric analyses of the determinants of self-employment and draw comparisons with the United States and the EU. Fifth we consider the importance of liquidity constraints and the role of inheritances and gifts and rising house prices in overcoming these credit constraints. Sixth, we examine macro-economic consequences and correlates of self-employment and draw a series of conclusions.  The aim of this paper is thus to identify the characteristics of the self-employed and   try to explain how and why their numbers have changed over time. ###newline###  A similar result holds in Table 2 for non-agricultural self-employment in these two countries. However, there are now several additional countries for which the trend  has  been upwards over the past 4 decades (or 3 where data for the 1960s is not available): Australia, Canada, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Mexico, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, and  Sweden.  Within these other countries it would appear that declines in agricultural self-employment have shrouded an upward trend in self-employment across other sectors. Moreover,  the  self-  employment rate falls by less (or increases in the case of those countries previously mentioned) across 24 of the 25 countries for which data are available when only those employed in non- agricultural activities are considered; the exception being Mexico. The difference is most apparent  in Poland, where the average non-agricultural self-employment rate was +9.0pp higher in the 2000s than the average of the 1960s, compared with a -12.6pp fall when all workers are considered. The change in the UK self-employment rate excluding agricultural workers is little different from that including those workers. But the change in the New Zealand rate is nearly twice as large (+7.7pp versus +4.7pp) when only those employed in non-agricultural activities are considered. Table 3 sets out a time series of self-employment rates for the United Kingdom, based on data published in various issues of the Employment Gazette between 1962 and 1991 (collected by the Department of Employment and Productivity (1962-1970); and the Department of Employment (1971-1991)), and subsequently data from the UK Labour Force Survey (LFS). In 2006, out of 28,959,000 workers, 3,753,000 or 13.0% of the labour force were classified as self-employed. This figure has increased markedly in recent years, up  from 11.9% in 2001.  Between  2001  and 2006, the number of employees increased by 3.5%, while the number of self-employed workers increased by 13.7%. The self-employment rate has been higher than this, however. The rate peaked  at just over 14% in 1991, and remained around 13.5% during much of the early 1990s, before gradually declining from 1997. But prior to the 1990s, the rate had been much lower. Using OECD data, the average self-employment rate in the United Kingdom during the 1960s was 7.1%; the 1970s, 8.0%; the 1980s, 10.8%; the 1990s, 13.3%; and the 2000s, 12.3%.   These averages clearly indicate that   the period of most rapid growth in UK self-employment was during the 1980s. As a validation of  the changes in self-employment it is appropriate to look at VAT registrations published by the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI).4 VAT registrations and deregistrations, according to the 1.8 million of the estimated 4.3 million enterprises in the UK were VAT-registered.  However,   some businesses do voluntarily register for VAT even though their turnover is below the threshold. Data for 2005 shows that around a fifth of all registrations had turnover below the VAT threshold. In 2005 there were 177,900 registrations and 152,900 de-registrations, resulting in an increase of 25,000 (1.4%) in the stock of VAT registered enterprises. As can be seen below there have been increases in the stock of VAT registrations in every year from 1995. Chart 1 shows that these movements in VAT registrations loosely track the changes in self- employment shown in Table 3   the correlation is +.60.6 On both measures there were marked declines in the period 1991-1994. However, the two series move in opposite directions between  1995 and 2002. The decline in the self-employment rate is primarily related to changes in the rules  of the Construction Industry Scheme (CIS), which is the Inland Revenue s taxation system for the construction industry. Freedman (2001) noted that between 1995 and 1997, 200,000 construction workers reclassified themselves as employees as a result of changes to the CIS. We discuss the impact of changes in the CIS in more detail below. It is also apparent that there have been significant changes in the size distribution of firms registered for VAT. The table below shows that the number of firms increased by nearly 620,000 between 2000 and 2005, of which just over 570,000 (92.1%) were firms with no employees. Table 4 reports survival rates of VAT registered enterprises for up to 10 years for the UK from 1995-2005.  The probability of a firm surviving 10 years is approximately one third.  Over  time the probability of survival has increased. The late 1980s account for most of the increase in the number of entrepreneurs in the UK economy   whether we define entrepreneurship using self-employment numbers or VAT registrations. The number of self-employed workers rose by more than two hundred and thirty thousand in each of the years 1986-1987, 1988-1989 and 1989-1990, while the 1987-1988 increase was a still healthy, one hundred and fifty thousand. So between 1986 and 1990 the number of self- employed grew by over eight hundred and fifty thousand, from 2.91 million to 3.76 million, while the rate grew from 11.8% to 14.0%. It is apparent that 1984 was also an important year for growth, with the largest (+266k) annual increase on record. Sharp falls in both self-employment and VAT registrations followed in the early 1990s, contemporaneous with the UK recession. The number of self-employed workers fell by -91k in 1991-1992, -208k in 1992-1993 and -58k in 1993-1994. It is notable, however, that the self- employment rate did not start to fall until 1992, while the unemployment rate started to rise in late 1990. This indicates that employees felt the effects of the downturn in demand earlier than the self- employed. The self-employment rate then stabilised for a period, before falling again. The number of self-employed workers declined in all but two  years between  1990  and 2000. This decline was dramatically reversed in 2003, when the number of self-employed workers rose by +229k. A further 100k individuals became self-employed in 2006, causing the self- employment rate to rise to 13.0%. VAT registrations also fell between 1997 and 2001 and then increased subsequently. The big increases in self-employment in the late-1980s occurred as unemployment was declining sharply, while the falls of the early 1990s occurred as the labour market loosened. In contrast, the 2001-2004 increase of more than three hundred thousand, alongside a jump of nearly one percentage point in the rate (11.9% in 2001 to 12.8% in 2004), seems  rather large given  that  the unemployment rate declined by only 0.4pp, from 5.2% to 4.8%, over this period. So how is self-employment related to the economic cycle? It is well established that the employment rate tends to move pro-cyclically, while the unemployment rate typically moves in the opposite direction. This inverse relationship is  very simple to explain. Every individual in the population (Pop) can be categorised into three groups: employed (E), unemployed (U) or inactive (I). We can therefore write: By dividing through by population and substituting the standard definitions for the employment    rate (e=E/Pop), unemployment rate (u= U/(U+E)) and the activity rate (a=(U+E)/Pop) into equation (1), we can state: This says that the employment rate should be negatively correlated with the unemployment rate given stable activity; which it is. Self-employment is a significant component of total employment, so one  might  imagine  that movements in the self-employment rate should also be closely (inversely) correlated with movements in the unemployment rate. But such a relationship is not clear in the United Kingdom. Chart 2 shows that while there was a strong negative correlation between 1984 and 1994 (-0.75),   the correlation over the 35 years since 1971 has been positive (+0.41). Furthermore, Chart 3 shows that the self-employment rate and total employment rate are actually negatively correlated over the same period. In other words, the self-employment rate is not well correlated with the economic  cycle and the inverse relationship between employment and unemployment between  1971  and 1984, and since 1994, is driven entirely by forms of employment other than self-employment. Why might this occur? In contrast, Chart 5 shows that the rate of transition of unemployed workers into self- employment falls during periods of economic expansion. For example, just 1.4% of self-employed workers in 2006 had been unemployed in 2005, but the proportion was 3.1% in 1993, when the unemployment rate was at its previous peak. Chart 6 shows the transition from out of the labour force (OLF), which is uncorrelated with the unemployment rate over the long run. The self-employment rate is clearly a function of both  push  and  pull  factors, which are related in opposite ways to measures of the economic cycle. It would therefore appear that the two effects cancel each other out to a degree over long periods and cause the self-employment rate to be uncorrelated with  the economic cycle.  However, it is also the case that other  factors are more  likely to dominate the decision to become self-employed. During the 1980s and early 1990s, self- employment was stimulated in the United Kingdom through changes in: industrial composition, stemming from shifts in relative demand; technological advancements; government policy; and financial markets. We now look at these in turn. The financial hurdles were further eroded by the liberalisation of banking rules in the 1980s and the subsequent appreciation of house prices (Chart 8). Robson (1998) argues that the major source of loan collateral for start-ups in the United Kingdom is the equity provided by owner occupied housing. Thus, rising house prices enable liquidity constrained, nascent entrepreneurs to start a business. The annual, nominal7 rate of house price inflation was positive throughout the 1980s, averaging 12.3%, according to the Nationwide index. Indeed, the average UK house price rose 170% between 1980 and 1989. And the home-ownership rate, propelled by the sale of council houses following the 1980 Housing Act and introduction of the Right-to-Buy scheme, rose from 57.6% in 1981 to 65.2% in 1989.8 Black et al. (1996), for example, found that a 10% rise in the  value of unreleased net housing equity increases the number of new firm VAT  registrations by  some 5%. Cowling and Mitchell (1997) estimate that a 10% rise in housing wealth increases the proportion of the workforce in self-employment by 3%. Over the 1980s, the number of self- employed workers rose by 1,327,000, or 60.2%. loans were granted worth about  2 billion. Of these, about a third went to start-ups. Table 5 shows that of the period total, around a third of firms (14,700) defaulted on their loan. The decision to become, and remain, self-employed can also be affected by the tax system. The methods for computing tax between employees and  self-employed workers vary  significantly in the United Kingdom (see Freedman (2001) for a comprehensive discussion). Freedman (2001) argues that attempts to evade the payment of tax in the construction sector influenced movements    in self-employment numbers over the late 1980s and 1990s. Under the original rules of the Construction Industry Scheme (CIS), which is the Inland Revenue s taxation system for the construction industry, employers had an incentive to treat employees as self-employed workers in order to avoid paying National Insurance Contributions, nor provide benefits, training or observe employment protection laws. The Inland Revenue took steps to revise the CIS in 1995 by introducing mandatory registration cards for all subcontractors.   Without the card, a subcontractor   is treated as an employee.  With the card, the subcontractor is paid under deduction of tax and  treated as self-employed. Freedman records that 700,000 construction industry  workers  were  treated as self-employed in 1986. But between 1995 and 1997, 200,000 construction workers reclassified themselves as employees, which can more than explain the reduction in self- employment over the period (-100k). Table 6 records a 12pp fall in the construction sector self- employment rate between 1995 and 2000 using LFS data, while most other sectors (the exception being agriculture) recorded more modest declines,  or small  increases.  The years 2000-2005 show an increase in the self-employment share of construction workers.   Table 7 shows the changes in   the industry distribution of the self-employed.   The declining importance of construction in terms   of its share from 1995-2000 is striking, as is its increased importance subsequently, alongside increases in Real Estate, Renting and Business Activities. Changes in the tax system can also have large, and sometimes unexpected, ramifications for the numbers of workers who choose to become self-employed. For instance, the UK government abolished corporation tax on the first  10,000 of company profits in April 2002, and also allowed directors of small companies to save income tax by taking their salaries as profits. This may have stimulated some already self-employed workers to incorporate in order to avoid paying income tax and national insurance contributions. But the changes probably also  contributed to an increase in  the number of employees who became self-employed; the number of self-employed workers increased by 10.1% between 2002Q1 and 2003Q4, according to the LFS. This increase is reflected  in a rise in the proportion of self-employed workers who had been employees a year earlier.  Table   8 shows that the flows from employment into self-employment, while volatile, peaked in 2002- 2003. The largest increase in self-employment (around half) during 2002-2003 came  in  the Banking, Finance and Insurance sectors and was dominated by the 35-49 age group, although there were also large increases in the 50-64/59 and 65/60 and over age groups. The rise seems consistent with media stories about City job losses leading to people moving into self-employment (Lindsay and Macaulay (2004)). In any case, the government re-considered its position  following  the increase in incorporations and decided to tax distributed profits at 19% in 2004, thus reducing the incentives for workers to turn to self-employment. Following this tax change, the flows from employment into self-employment declined. An additional exogenous stimulus to self-employment growth over the past few decades has been a steady decline in the price of investment goods, particularly  information, communication  and technology (ICT) products, relative to other goods (Chart 9).  Such a decline can be explained  by an increase in technological progress in the development of these goods in comparison with   other sectors (Bakhshi & Thompson (2002)).   These price falls will have increased the relative   rates of return from self-employment, making independence more attractive (Blau, 1987 and Acs et al., 1994). Over the past couple of years there has been a substantial growth in the numbers of self employed as well as in the self-employment rate  The data below are taken from Table 3 of Labour Market Statistics First Release, ONS April 2007.  Total  employment also includes small numbers   of unpaid family workers and those on Government schemes. The numbers of self-employed over the period Dec-Feb 2005-2007 increased by 187,000, representing 64.0% of the total growth of employment of 292,000 over the period.9  Moreover, only 37.6% of the additional employee jobs were full-time compared with 61.8% of self-employed jobs. In addition, over the most recent  quarter, December 2006   February 2007, the number of employees fell by 68,000  while  the number of self-employed grew by 30,000. What explains this increase? Early analysis of LFS data for the period 2004-2006 suggests little if any change in the distribution of the self-employed by industry (Table 7) or by occupation or  region.10  However,  there have been increases in the proportion of the self-employed that are a) immigrants, b) females. At the same time there have been increases in the age of the self-employed and a decline in the hours worked over this period. Chart 10 shows changes in the transition rates into and out of self- employment since 1995 for those of working age using matched data from the LFS. Data are only available from the ONS to do this matching for those of working age. There is little evidence of much change in the transition rates over time. The most pronounced change has been a small increase in the flow into self-employment from inactivity. Chart 11 shows that self-employment rates have remained roughly constant over time at all ages except for those above retirement age, which continues to rise for both men and women. As a result the average age of the self-employed continues to rise. Below we present the (weighted) age, proportion male and proportion immigrant of the self-employed between 2001 and 2006 from the Data are available in the Spring quarter of each year of the LFS from the variables oycirc and oystat, which report the individual's labour market status and whether they were self-employed or not a year earlier and is not restricted to those of working age. These enable us to calculate transition probabilities for all ages (as in Table 8 and charts 4, 5 and 6). Reported below is labour market status in year t-1 for those who were self-employed in year t. It is apparent that the outflow rate from self-employment has slowed while the inflow rate from OLF has increased alongside a decline in the inflow rate from being an employee. It is also feasible to use these data to identify which industries the new self-employed move into. Here we define the new self-employed as individuals who were self-employed in period t, but not self-employed in t-1. The industry distribution of the changers is as follows (%). The biggest change is the increase in the proportion working in Other Community, Social and Personal. At this time it is by no means obvious why the self-employment rate has increased.  In part   it is because of increased immigration alongside moves to self-employment from those who had previously been OLF. It does not appear that the most recent increase in self-employment has been the result of changes in regulation, tax changes or changes in the minimum wage (Blanchflower et  al. 2007a, 2007b). However, we do believe that rising house prices are a significant explanatory factor through their ability to ease credit constraints (see below). ###newline###  We make use of data from the Family Resources Survey (FRS) and the Survey of Personal Incomes (SPI) conducted by HM Revenue & Customs (HMRC) to compare the earnings of the self-employed with those of employees, as the LFS does not ask respondents who classify themselves as being self-employed about their labour income(s). The earnings distributions for the self-employed and employees are very different. Median incomes are lower for the self-employed than for employees, but the self-employed distribution has a longer right hand tail, so somebody  90% up the self-employment earnings distribution has higher earnings than an employee at the 90th percentile of the wage and salary distribution. For example, the median gross weekly income from self-employment in 2005 was  249 ( 12,948 annually), according to the FRS. This compares with  333 per week ( 17,316 annually) for employees (Chart 12a). The lower weekly income for self- employed workers partly reflects the fact that 6.9% of self-employed workers actually earned nothing, or lost money as a result of their occupation in 2005. Excluding these workers causes the median gross weekly wage rate to rise to  276 (a sixth less than employed workers). HMRC collects data on individuals  incomes, principally for tax modelling and forecasting purposes. A sample of this data is made available in the form of the SPI, which provides the most comprehensive and accurate official source of data on personal incomes in the UK. The dataset contains a range of variables related to taxable personal incomes arising from employment, self- employment, pensions, benefits, property, savings and investments and other income sources. Also included are variables related to allowances, deductions and tax relief that people may be due. A limitation of the data, however, is that a continuous time series is only available from 1999/00. The SPI is carried out annually.11 Data are collected from three HMRC operational IT systems, which  are as follows: COP: this covers all employees and occupational or personal pension recipients with a PAYE record; rent or untaxed investment income, directors and other people with complex tax affairs or high incomes. Some people have both a COP and CESA record. Claims: this covers people without COP or CESA records who have had too much tax deducted at source and claim repayment. HMRC has kindly supplied data to us on employee and self-employee income distributions from the SPI, for the financial years 1999/00 to 2003/4. The distributions are banded, with lower limit thresholds ranging from zero (for self-employees) to  100,000+.  The data presented below   for 2003/4 indicate that 4.0 million individuals earned some income from self-employment   while another half a million self-employed reported no positive income. This compares with 3.63 million self-reported self-employed in the LFS for the same period. The difference between the  two numbers reflects the fact that some individuals have more than one job. Total earnings from self- employment are recorded at  67,750 million in 2003/4, compared with  446,000 million for data from the Family Resources Surveys. These results are broadly supported by data from HMRC with data for 2003/4 and 1999/00 from the SPI (Charts 14a & 14b), although the proportion of self- employed workers earning more than employees is slightly smaller. We can appreciate the significant returns available to the most successful  entrepreneurs based in Britain by looking at the Sunday Times Rich List. The list, which is compiled annually, records estimates of the minimum identifiable wealth of Britain s 1,000 richest  people  or  families.14 The results measure identifiable wealth, whether land, property, racehorses, art or significant shares in publicly quoted companies.  Personal bank accounts are excluded   as access   in not permitted. The most recent valuations available at the time of writing were carried out at the beginning of January 2007.15  The results show that the richest entrepreneur in Britain (and 7th in   the world) was Lakshmi Mittal, worth  19,250 million. The 1,000th richest  person  had  an  estimated personal fortune of  70 million. Clearly the returns for the most successful self-employed far exceed the highest paid employees   although some on the list have made a significant  proportion of their wealth as city traders.  The wealthiest trader in the 2007 list, which we might  take to be the wealthiest employee in Britain, was Michael Sherwood, worth an estimated  225 million (319th). Of those in the 2007 list, 1,028 were men and just 92 were women   the number is higher than 1,000 because some entries are couples or families. The eldest entrant was aged 94, while the youngest was 25. There are a total of 774 self-made millionaires, while the rest inherited their wealth. A fifth of the most wealthy made their fortunes in land and property. The breakdown by industry corresponds closely with our previous analysis of the LFS. Over half of the entrants live, or have their primary interests centred in London (41%) or the south east (12%), again similar to our results from the LFS The average age of the top 15 wealthiest entrants in 2007 was 58. Of those that are self-made billionaires, rather than having inherited their fortunes (as is the case for the Duke of Westminster, Charlene and Michel de Carvalho, and Kirsten and Jorn Rausing), six have  a  degree-level  education and six do not. None of the British born entrants in the top 15 has a degree. We could  only find an estimated income figure for Lakshmi Mittal, which was estimated to be  413 million   in 2007. But are these characteristics the exception or the rule? ###newline###  Thus far we have explained factors that may exogenously affect individuals  decisions to become self-employed. But what if some workers are more pre-disposed to becoming self-  employed than others? It is appropriate at this point to compare the characteristics of the self- employed with those of employees. We do so by examining weighted means from the UK Labour Force Surveys. In the LFS, self-employed workers (aged 16+) were on average six years older than their employed counterparts in 2006 (45.8 vs. 39.3 respectively). Chart 15 illustrates that the age distribution of the self-employed is skewed to the right, compared with  that for employees.  It  seems plausible that younger workers are less likely to have the necessary human capital (experience) to become self-employed. Younger individuals are probably also more likely to be credit constrained, limiting a larger proportion of them from starting a new business. At the other  end of the distribution, older workers face retirement, but that is not an issue for the self-employed. Indeed, many retirees (either at state pension age or earlier) may take advantage of the opportunity self-employment brings to remain in the workplace, providing their skills on their own terms. It is probably also fair to say that there is an element of risk  in becoming self-employed, and this risk  can be minimised if workers have previously ensured financial stability (e.g. mortgage paid off) by working for others. The split between male and female employees is roughly equal (56.6% male).   However,   the micro-data suggest that the self-employed are predominantly male (80.1% in 2006). This probably reflects the fact that self-employment is more common in industries not usually associated with high levels of female employment, such as construction (see below). It may also be a by- product of the fact that a much higher proportion of women are part time workers. The self-employed have more dependent children in their family under the age of 19 (.79 children) than is the case of employees (.71).16 This is consistent with the findings of Broussard et al (2003) for the US. The self-employed are more likely to work in occupations that are human-capital and labour intensive, such as construction, financial activities or agriculture. Chart 16 shows that nearly a quarter of self-employed individuals worked in the construction industry in 2006, compared with  just 6% of employees. A further 20% worked in finance, real estate and business activities and almost all agricultural employees - though few in total - were self-employed. In general, we would think that service sector industries are more suited to self-employment as there will typically be lower start-up costs, reducing barriers to entry; although a lack of human capital or qualifications to signal ability (certainly for business activities, such as consultancy) may act as impediments. Chart 17 shows that about a fifth of both employees and self-employed workers  had  a degree in 2006.   Indeed, the distributions of the two sets of workers are very similar in general.    The one major difference is the higher proportion of the self-employed with Apprenticeship and  craft qualifications. This suggests that the decision to become self-employed is not related to educational attainment, although, as we noted above, it seems to be more related to age and experience. This is quite different from the US where self-employment rates are particularly high among those with higher degrees, especially MBAs (see Blanchflower and Wainwright, 2005).  We  provide  more  assessment of the differences in the characteristics of the self-employed between the US and the   UK below. This would seem intuitive for business activities and consultancy, where specialist individuals may be employed by larger firms, or agriculture, where a lone individual can use technology to tend  many activities.  The distribution by industry for those with and without employees is as below.   The main difference is that the self-employed tend to be sole contractors in construction and have employees in distribution. When the self-employed do employ others, more than 90% have fewer than 20 employees.  This is  in stark contrast to the employed, where two-thirds work in firms employing 25 or more workers. Interestingly, the proportion of the self-employed with employees has shown a steady decline over time, corroborating the trend in the VAT registrations data presented earlier. The self-employed tend to work longer hours than employees. On average, the self- employed worked 40 hours per week in 2006, compared with only 34 hours for employees (Chart 18).  However, the self-employed are only marginally less likely than employees to say that they   are part-timers. For example, the latest figures available at the time of writing are for December 2006-February 2007 and show that 25.7% of employees were part-time compared with 23.6% of the self-employed. Moreover, if the self-employed report that  they  are part-time they  actually  work fewer usual hours than employees (17.3 and 18.1 per week respectively) whereas the reverse   is the case for those who report being full-timers (46.3 and 39.3 hours respectively). There is considerable variation by region in  self-employment rates.  In  2006, using  region of work to define location, self-employment rates ranged from under 8% in Tyne and Wear to just There are differences in self-employment rates by race. In 2006, in the UK, the rate for whites was 13.0% compared with 14.6% for Asians; 8.5% for blacks and 17.1% for Chinese. The self-employment rate of immigrants is generally  higher than that of the indigenous population.  Clark and Drinkwater (2000), in their study of self-employment among ethnic minorities  in  England and Wales, found that minorities who live in areas which have a high percentage of their Column 1 of Table 9 presents data from the Labour Force Surveys of 2004-2006, which contain data on 633,161 workers and shows that the (weighted) self-employment rate for the UK born was 12.5% compared with 14.5% for immigrants and 12.7% overall. The  data  file  is  restricted to those aged 16-70. The table also suggests that there is considerable variation in self- employment rates by the immigrants  country of birth. Self-employment rates were highest among those born in Romania (44%), Iran (32%), Thailand (32%), Pakistan (31%) and Turkey (27%) and lowest for those born in the Philippines (3%), Slovakia (3%) and Finland (1%). Self-employment rates tend to be lower for more recent immigrants, in part, for the very obvious reason, that they   tend to be younger. For example, average self-employment rates and average age based on number of years in the UK for immigrants is as follows (LFS 2004-2006) In the second column of Table 9 we present equivalent evidence on  self-employment rates by country of birth for the United States using data for 2,552,483 workers from the Basic Monthly files of the Current Population Survey. Here we define self-employment to include both the unincorporated and the incorporated self-employed. In the official statistics the self-employment  rate only includes the unincorporated, although their earnings are not included in wage and salary measures.18 We only present evidence for countries where there are matched pairs -  these  exclusions are not significant. In the US, the self-employment rate of immigrants (10.1%) is marginally less than that of the indigenous population (10.6%).  The self-employment rate of the  UK born in the US (12.8%) is virtually identical to the rate in the UK as a whole (12.7%). In  contrast the self-employment rates, of those born in the US who reside in the UK, (17.6%) is higher than in the US (10.6%). Interestingly, there is no correlation between the self employment rates across the two countries. The LFS data indicate that a number of individuals who are employees also work self- employed in a second job. It turns out  that  this is a particularly important phenomenon  in the  public sector, especially among academics and health professionals, including therapists. It is especially high for those with higher degrees. Overall, 0.9% of employees in their main job had a second job that was self-employed: the rate was 0.6% in the private sector and 1.5% in the public. The self-employed are generally more satisfied with their jobs than employees  (Blanchflower and Oswald, 1998; Blanchflower, 2004; Green and Tsitsianis, 2006).  In  an  important paper, Frey and Benz (2002) examine job satisfaction data for the UK, Germany and Switzerland and find evidence that the self-employed are more satisfied at work than employees. What is impressive about this paper is that the authors have panel data over a number of years on   the same individuals for both the UK (1991-1999) and Germany (1984-2000) and show that this result remains even in the presence of people specific fixed effects. There is also some recent evidence from Finland suggesting that the self-employed are less risk averse than employees. Ekelund et al (2005) used data from the 1966 Northern Finnish Birth Cohort Study. Unfortunately the measure of risk-aversion is a contemporaneous one so it is difficult to determine causality. The self-employed seem to like their jobs despite the fact that their work isn t easy. The self-employed report that they a) work under a lot of pressure, b) find their work stressful, c) come home from work exhausted, d) are constantly under strain, e) lose sleep over worry, f) place more weight on work than they do on leisure, but g) are especially likely to say they have control over their lives (Blanchflower, 2004). The self-employed in the UK also tend to report relatively high levels of happiness and life satisfaction (Blanchflower, 2004; Blanchflower and Oswald, 2004) and job satisfaction (Taylor, 2004; Green and Tsitsianis, 2005).  To illustrate, the European Quality of Life Survey of 2003   asked respondents for their happiness, life satisfaction and job satisfaction on a scale of 1 to 10,   with 10 being highest. The weighted average job satisfaction score for the UK was 8.31 for the self-employed and 7.22 for employees. The weighted scores for life satisfaction and happiness for the UK in 2003 were as follows: Results are similar in the British Household Panel Study Sweep 13 taken primarily during 2004   with around 8% of responses in 2005. Levels of overall job satisfaction   based on a scale of 1 through seven - were 5.7 for the self-employed and 5.4 for employees. In addition the  self- employed were also less satisfied with their job security (5.0 and 5.5) and their hours (5.0 and 5.3). Analogously the self-employed scored 5.4 and employees 5.2 when asked if they were satisfied   with their life overall, once again on a scale of 1-7.  The self-employed in the UK score highly on  job satisfaction, life satisfaction and happiness. The self-employed report that they like another aspect of independence, the flexibility the  job brings and the fact that they can pick their schedule (Hytinnen and  Ruuskanen,  2007).  However, the self-employed are especially likely to report being stressed (Blanchflower, 2004). Respondents in the 14th sweep of the BHPS were asked "Do you worry about job problems after work?" Weighted responses were as follows (%). 4. Econometric analysis of the probability of a randomly selected worker being self-employed Given the differences that exist in the characteristics of the self-employed in terms of their location, occupation, industry, schooling, age and gender it is appropriate to examine the extent to which there have been changes over time, holding constant these characteristics, in a regression framework. There is a growing body of research that has examined the probability that a randomly sampled worker is self-employed (see Blanchflower 2000, 2004 for a summary). The main results from this work are as follows. Self-employment is higher among men than women; among older workers than younger workers. It is also especially high among some immigrant groups, such as Asians. It does vary by location, being especially high in construction occupations, agriculture and Tables 10 and 11 report the results of estimating the probability of a randomly selected worker being self-employed. The dependent variable is set to one if self-employed, zero if an employee; the estimation procedure is dprobit in STATA.19 Data used are from the Labour Force Survey and in Table 10 cover the period for January 1994 - December 1996, while Table 11 performs an equivalent exercise ten years later from January 2004 - December 2006. In the first period, the mean self-employment rate in our data was 13.7% compared with 12.7% in the subsequent period. Where feasible identical controls are included; the major exception  is  occupation because of changes in the classification system used by the ONS in 2000. Controls in column 1 include age and its square; a gender dummy; four race dummies and six schooling dummies. As we move across the columns controls are added - an immigrant dummy in column 2; region of residence and industry dummies in column 3 and occupation dummies in column 4. Interestingly, the patterns in the means isolated above are robust in the regressions. 63.8 in column 1 of Table 10 and at age 70 in column 4. In column 1 of Table 11, for the later  period the maximum was 76.7 compared with 73.0 in column 4. The positive sign on the age variable and the negative sign on the age squared term permits the calculation of these maxima. The probability of self-employment is higher for men, whites, Asians and immigrants generally, as well as for those with A-levels or equivalent, of which over half are individuals with trade apprenticeships (5.5%) or City & Guilds Advanced Craft Qualifications (45.3%). Probabilities are also high in the South West and London as well as in Agriculture and Construction. Occupations with high self-employment rates include Health Professionals; Construction Trades; Hairdressers; Artistic and Sports Occupations and Agricultural Occupations. The probability of self-employment is relatively low for blacks and those with Higher Education qualifications, which primarily include NVQ level 4 and teaching qualifications. It is also low in Distribution and Manufacturing and, of course, in the Public Sector. Ceteris paribus rates were lowest in Tyne and Wear in both periods. It is apparent that the patterns that emerge in Table 11 for 2004-2006 are very similar to those  for the period 1994-1996. The age maximum increased over time, as noted above, but the gender, education and race gaps were broadly unchanged. Table 12 presents the results of estimating a further dprobit modelling the probability that   an employee in their main job will have a second job where they are self-employed. So the dependent variable is one if an employee in the first job and self-employed in the second zero otherwise. All those reporting being self-employed in their first job are omitted. Probabilities are higher for men, whites and rise with age reaching a maximum over the age 54 in  column 3.  They are especially high in London and East Anglia. As noted earlier, self-employed second jobs are especially important for people with higher degrees and teaching qualifications and are particularly important in universities. If we count these individuals into the self-employment count they add nearly a percentage point (mean=0.87%). How do the characteristics of the self-employed in the UK compare with those in the United States? As background, Table 13 provides details of the distribution of incorporated and unincorporated self-employment and wage and salary employment by gender, race and whether foreign born for the US in 2005.20 There were approximately twice as many unincorporated self- employed than incorporated   10 and a half million and 5 and a quarter million respectively. The incidence of self-employment is highest in middle age and is higher among men. In  comparison  with wage and salary work, minorities are under-represented in self-employment. For example, 11.5% of wage and salary workers are black compared with 6.3% of unincorporated and 3.7% of incorporated self-employed and similarly for the foreign born. In contrast, Asians have a higher representation in incorporated self-employment than they do in wage and salary work. Table 14 presents econometric evidence for the United States comparable to that for the UK in Table A.11, again for 2004-2006, using data from the Basic Monthly files of the Current Population Survey (BMCPS) for the same years as in Table 11. The US sample size is four times larger at over two and a half million workers.   The dependent variable is defined in the same way   as in Tables 10 and 11, set to one if self-employed and zero if an employee. As in Table 9, the self- It is necessary, however, to make an adjustment in the various regressions we  report  because there are repeat observations of individuals and households in the Current Population Survey. This has the effect of biasing downwards the size  of the standard errors and biasing  upwards the t-statistics, although it will leave the size of the estimated coefficients unchanged. The intuition is that the same people are in the survey multiple times, which causes a statistical problem as the econometric method assumes we are sampling different people. If we did not do this adjustment this would have the effect of wrongly suggesting statistical significance when it was not present, although practically this has little effect as the standard errors are generally so small. To adjust for the problem of repeat observations we cluster the standard errors at the level    of the household using the cluster procedure in the econometric software program STATA. In total there are more than half a million data points for the period 2004-2006.21 Care has also to be taken because the individual identifiers in the BMCPS are recycled, which means that once an individual leaves the survey that number is given to another individual as they join the sample.  These individual identifiers are recycled to individuals in the same area. Given this recycling problem we have had to adjust the data a second time to ensure that individuals and households are identified appropriately.  We do so by  creating a new identifier with the year the household first appears in   the data file appended to the end of the original identifier, which solves the problem. The main results are as follows - where possible we draw direct comparisons with results from the UK, for the same period 2004-2006, in Table 11. The self-employment rate of men is higher than it is for women. It rises with age and reaches a maximum of 67.1 in column 1 and 72.5 in column 4.  Probabilities are higher for immigrants  holding constant characteristics, which was not true in the means. Self-employment rates for blacks are lower than for whites both in the UK and the US. In contrast to the UK, self-employment rates are highest for those with professional  qualifications such as an MBA and a PhD in the US. Rates are highest in Montana and California and lowest in West Virginia, Delaware and the District of Columbia. As in the UK, self-employment rates are highest in Agriculture and Construction and among Artistic and Sporting as well as Sales occupations. They are also high in the US among Personal Care and Service Occupations. Finally, Table 15 reports self-employment probabilities across EU member states using data from the Eurobarometer data series. The first column covers data from 14 member countries plus Norway for the period 1974-2002. Column 2 performs a similar exercise, but for a very recent  sweep of the Eurobarometer series, from December 2005- January 2006 and includes a larger  sample of countries, including the new East European member states. In both cases the UK is the excluded category. The dependent variable once again is one if self-employed, zero if an employee. The main evidence from this table is as follows. There has been a declining time trend in the incidence of self-employment across member  states. There is no evidence that the age squared term is significant - the probability of being self- employed rises linearly with age in each column. In comparison to the UK, based on column 2, self-employment rates are significantly higher in Turkish Cyprus; the Czech Republic; East Germany; Greece; Italy; Poland; Romania and Turkey. To summarise, self-employment probabilities in the UK rise with age, are high for men, whites, immigrants, individuals with trade apprenticeships, workers in the South West and London as well as in Agriculture and Construction. Occupations with high self-employment rates include Health Professionals; Construction Trades; Hairdressers; Artistic and Sports Occupations and Agricultural Occupations. Broadly similar patterns are found in both the US and the EU. ###newline###  Even though approximately one worker in eight is self-employed in the UK there appears to remain a strong desire among employees to be self-employed. Blanchflower, Oswald and Stutzer (2001) examined data from the 1997/8 International Social Survey Programme and  found  that nearly half of employees in the UK expressed a desire to be  self-employed.  New  data  have recently become available from five sweeps of the Entrepreneurship Flash Eurobarometers on the same issue.  There is consistent evidence in Table 16 from both data sources that approximately   half of all wage workers in the UK say they would prefer to be self-employed; this pattern is repeated in other countries in the survey and is especially high in the US and Portugal.22 This raises an important puzzle. Why do so few individuals manage to translate their preferences into action? Lack of start-up capital appears to be one likely explanation. In work based on US micro data at the level of the individual, Evans and Leighton (1989), and Evans and Jovanovic (1989), have argued that entrepreneurs face liquidity constraints. The authors use the National Longitudinal Survey of Young Men for 1966-1981, and the Current Population Surveys for 1968-1987. The key test shows that, all else remaining equal, people with greater family assets are more likely to switch to self-employment from employment. This asset variable enters probit equations significantly and with a quadratic form. Although Evans and his collaborators draw the conclusion that capital and liquidity constraints bind, this claim is open to   the objection that other interpretations of their correlation are feasible. One  possibility,  for  example, is that inherently acquisitive individuals both start their own businesses and forego leisure to build up family assets. In this case, there would be a correlation between family assets and movement into self-employment even if capital constraints did not exist.  A second possibility is  that the correlation between family assets and the movement to self-employment arises because children tend to inherit family firms. Parker (2002) provides some much needed theory on whether banks ration enterprises. Blanchflower and Oswald (1998), find that the probability of self-employment depends positively upon whether the individual ever received an inheritance or  gift.  Burke et al (2000,  2002) replicate the findings using the same data source. Work  by  Holtz-Eakin,  Joulfaian  and Rosen (1994a, 1994b), drew similar conclusions using different methods on US data. Lindh and Ohlsson (1994) adopt the Blanchflower-Oswald procedure and provide complementary evidence   for Sweden. Bernhardt (1994), in a study for Canada, using data from the 1981 Social Change in Canada Project also found evidence that capital constraints appear to bind. And Kidd (1993) also reported that the availability of capital in Australia is a significant barrier to self-employment. Taylor (2001), in an interesting paper that uses the British Household Panel Study for the period 1994-1996, explores the impact of windfall gains on self-employment.  A windfall payment  is defined as being from a personal accident claim; a redundancy payment; an annual/seasonal   bonus from employment; a win on the football pools; national lottery or other sort of gambling; or anything else. Taylor finds that the size of the payment received has a positive, and concave, Johansson (2000a, 2000b), in studies for Finland, used a unique data file drawn from the Longitudinal Employment Statistics, compiled by Statistics Finland. It covers the years 1987-1995 and includes, in principle, every individual who has had a job in Finland during the period   it is    the population. A sample of just over 100,000 workers aged 18-65 was randomly selected and they were followed from 1987-1994.   Johannsson s empirical strategy was to model the probability of   an individual entering self-employment. The main result from the study was that a higher level of wealth significantly increased the probability that an individual made a transition from wage- employment to self-employment. Yannis and Wall (2005) find that capital constraints in Germany based on the GSOEP are especially important for men in explaining movements into self- employment. Moreover Holtz-Eakin and Rosen (2005), also using the GSOEP, found that German workers faced capital constraints that are more severe than those faced by American workers. Hurst and Lusardi (2004) have claimed that there is little evidence that lack of wealth constrains entrepreneurship apart from at the top of the wealth distribution   above the 95th percentile. They make this claim using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics for the  period 1989-1994, which contains only 7,500 observations. Very  few people in their data    only 304 or 4% - actually transit into self-employment. It appears that their results are driven entirely by measurement error and hence should be ignored. Not finding evidence for something in a poorly specified equation tells us little or nothing about the role of capital constraints or of wealth in Using the 1991 French Household Survey of Financial Assets, Laferrere and McEntee (1995), examined the determinants of self-employment using data on intergenerational transfers of wealth, education, informal human capital and a range of demographic variables. They also find evidence of the importance played by the family in the decision to enter self-employment. Intergenerational transfers of wealth, familial transfers of human capital and the structure of the family were found to be determining factors in the decision to move from wage work into entrepreneurship. Broussard et al. (2003) found that the self-employed in the US have between .2 and .4 more children compared to the non-self-employed. The authors argue that having more children can increase the likelihood that an inside family member will be a good match at running the business. One might also think that the existence of family businesses, which are particularly prevalent in farming, is a further way to overcome the existence of capital constraints. Transfers of firms within families will help to preserve the status quo and will work against the interests of blacks in particular, who do not have as strong a history of business ownership as indigenous whites. Blanchflower, Levine and Zimmerman (2003) examined the availability of  credit  to minority and female-owned small businesses using data from the 1993 and 1998 National Surveys  of Small Business Finances  conducted by the Reserve Board of Governors.  They  demonstrated  that loan denial probabilities for African-American owned firms are approximately double those for comparable white-owned firms. Even when African-Americans were able  to  obtain  loans they  have to pay higher interest rates. Comparable, but smaller effects are found for Hispanics. These differences were not explained by differences in creditworthiness or other observables. Such differences disappeared when the use of credit cards was examined, where the banks were unaware of the race of the applicant. The authors found that firms owned by minorities are discriminated against in the credit market. Similar results were found by Cavalluzzo, Cavalluzzo and Wolken (2002). A recent study published by the US Chamber of Commerce (2005) confirms the findings in Blanchflower, Levine and Zimmerman (2003).  The survey was conducted in March and April   2005  and detailed the financing problems experienced by small business owners, 95% of whom   had less than 100 employees: 1,080 business owners were interviewed and reported that minority businesses rely heavily on credit cards to fund their businesses, often do not apply for credit, even though they need it, for fear of being denied and were especially likely to need working capital. In particular they report that the availability of credit is their top problem, exactly as reported by Blanchflower, Levine and Zimmerman (2003). The biggest difference in responses between minorities and Caucasian men and women was availability of credit: 19% of Caucasian  males  report credit as their top problem compared with 54% for minority males   a 35 percentage point difference. There was a 15 percentage point difference for women. In no other category is there  more than a 10 percentage point difference for men or women. It is appropriate to examine some new empirical evidence which appears to support the proposition that liquidity constraints bind on small businesses. First we examine the impact of inheritances and gifts and then the role of rising house prices and find they both appear to generate more self-employment. Table 17 uses new evidence from the National Child Development Study (NCDS) on the incidence of self-employment among workers in their mid forties. The NCDS is a birth cohort Another type of windfall is an increase in house prices, which may help home owners to overcome capital constraints by releasing home equity. Rising house prices, for example, enable liquidity constrained nascent entrepreneurs to start a business, or even to enable  it  to  survive.  Black et al (1996), for example, found that a 10% rise in the value of housing equity increased the number of new firm VAT registrations in the UK by  some 5%.  Taylor (2004) found that an  increase in house prices increased the probability of self-employment entry. Chart 8 above  suggested that, at the national level, changes in self-employment and nominal house price inflation moved reasonably closely together.  The self-employment rate ticked up in 2005 as house prices  rose and fell at the end of the 1980s as house prices fell. We explore this relationship more closely in Table A.18, where we regress the log of the self-employment rate, defined by region and year, on the (log) house price and the log of the regional unemployment rate, as well as a full set of year dummies and a lagged dependent variable. The year dummies can be thought of as proxying inflation, so the house price variable should be thought of as being in real terms. The year dummies will also capture any time-variant, year- specific factors that affect all regions symmetrically   such as changes in legislation. In each of the columns 1-4, the house price variable enters significantly, with or without a lagged dependent variable or with region fixed effects. The unemployment rate is significant in columns 1 and 3 (although of opposite sign), but not in the presence of the lagged dependent variable. The unemployment rate does become significant in column 5, however, where the year dummies are replaced with an (insignificant) price deflator, but this equation fails to account for the effects of legislative changes.  The house price elasticity of our preferred equation (column 4)  means that a doubling of house prices leads to an increase in the self-employment rate of 9.5%, so the effect isn t small. We take this as evidence of liquidity constraints being eased for nascent entrepreneurs as house prices rise, entirely consistent with the findings of Black et al. (1996) for the period 1966-1990, Cowling and Mitchell (1997) for the period 1972-1992, and Taylor (2004) for Between 2005Q1 and 2007Q1 approximately 70% of the growth in total UK employment has been from self-employment (217k out of 305k), raising the self-employment rate from 12.6 percentage points to 13.2 percentage points, which is an increase of 4.9%. Over the same period aggregate UK house prices have appreciated by 14.7%. Solving out the long run elasticity of the self-employment rate wrt to (log) house prices from column 4 of Table A.18, gives +0.17123: To give an indication of how to interpret the size of this elasticity of 0.171, such a number means that if house prices double the associated long-run impact is to increase the self-employment rate by approximately a sixth. This elasticity therefore suggests that rising house prices can potentially explain approximately half (14.7 * .171 = 2.5%) of the observed 4.9% increase in the  UK self-employment rate between 2005 and 2007. Liquidity constraints continue to bind for ###newline###  Self-employment rose sharply in the United Kingdom during the 1980s, encouraged by focussed government intervention and supported by financial liberalisation. The period was also characterised by sustained and rapid economic growth. But did greater self-employment cause heightened growth? Greater numbers of self-employed workers in an economy should, in theory, increase labour market flexibility in response to demand shocks because there is no binding wage contract on the number of hours worked. In turn, Millard (2000) argues that this should lead to greater output and consumption and lower unemployment. There is no empirical evidence to support  such  a  theoretical proposition. As we noted above, self-employment appears to be uncorrelated with unemployment, although transitions between employees and self-employment are negatively correlated with unemployment, while transitions from unemployment to self-employment are positively correlated.  In aggregate these two effects roughly cancel each other out.   What about   any relationship with output? Evidence from a series of GDP growth equations for twenty-three countries over the period 1966-1996 presented in Blanchflower (2000) suggested that a higher self-employment rate does not increase the real growth rate of the economy; in fact there was even some evidence to  the  contrary.24 We repeat this analysis here for a longer time period and more countries. Table 19 examines the relationship between the growth  in real GDP and changes in the self-employment   rate, using time series data on the 30 OECD countries for the period 1967-2005 (the  additional seven countries are Czech Republic, Hungary, Korea, Mexico, Poland, Slovakia and Switzerland). As in Blanchflower (2000), the regressions should be thought of as a Cobb-Douglas production function, where the change in the numbers of employees over the previous period is included to distinguish the labour input. Capital is assumed to grow linearly and as the model is estimated in changes the effect of capital will be in the constant. Also included in the regressions are a set of country dummies plus a lagged dependent variable. The columns in Table 19 experiment with different measures of self-employment. Columns 1 and 2 define self-employment as the number of self-employed as a percentage of total employment.  Columns 3 and  4 define self-employment as  the number of non-agricultural self-employed as a percentage of total non-agricultural employment.25 These results presume a particular direction of causation, from self-employment to growth and not the reverse. Columns 1 and 3 include the change in the self-employment rate and a lagged GDP term. Columns 2 and 4 add the change in the number of employees. In no case is the change in the self-employment rate significant: experimenting with longer lags produced similar results. The results confirm Blanchflower s (2000) earlier findings, but for a richer data set   we  find no evidence that changes in self-employment are correlated with changes in real GDP. Another measure of economic benefit could be greater happiness. Table 20 presents  evidence on life satisfaction using data from the Eurobarometer trend file of 1970-2002 for 16 European countries in column 1 and for the UK in column 2. The final column uses data from the most recently available (14th) sweep of the British Household Panel Study of 2004/5. In all three columns the self-employed have significantly higher life satisfaction than do employees. So can a higher self-employment rate lead to greater aggregate happiness?  The results are not supportive.  We substituted mean life satisfaction scores on a four point scale taken from the World Database of Happiness for 1976-2006 for GDP growth and repeated our previous analysis. The question asked was "How satisfied are you with the life you lead?   very satisfied; fairly satisfied; not very  satisfied; not at all satisfied, where very is coded as 4 down through not at all which is coded as 1. We include GDP growth as an explanatory variable, along with inflation  and  the unemployment rate and a complete set of country and year dummies.26 Self-employment fails to provide any incremental information in explaining happiness when these other variables are included. We find evidence that both unemployment and inflation lower happiness, although the effect is greater for unemployment than it is for inflation, as found by Di Tella et al (2001) and Wolfers (2003). The GDP term, which they did not include, enters significantly positive. It remains uncertain why self- employment enters positively into a micro-level happiness equation, but not into a macro-level equation. These results, of course, do not mean that higher self-employment is a bad thing. A very  high proportion of individuals across a number of surveys express the desire to become self- employed. We certainly find no evidence that more self-employment is bad for the economy. The self-employed seem to especially value their independence. Many governments around the world believe that it is appropriate to try and make their economies more entrepreneurial, but that need    not necessarily imply a higher self-employment rate. And it also means that a higher self- employment rate cannot be expected to translate directly into greater economic success. A lower self-employment rate could conceivably be better. Can we imagine a society consisting almost exclusively of wage and salary workers? It would seem unlikely that  a  self-employment  rate around zero would be optimal. Unfortunately, we have no way of knowing what number governments should be aiming for. Market forces need to prevail and Blanchflower s (2004) conclusion stands; more may not be better. Let the market rip. The probability of being self-employed in the United Kingdom is higher for men and rises non-linearly with age. Those with craft qualifications, including trade apprenticeships, are more likely to be self-employed, and rates are higher for those working in the construction or retailing industries. Immigrants are more likely to be self-employed, but there is considerable variation by country of birth. Probabilities are also high in the South West and London as well as in Agriculture and Construction. Occupations with high self-employment rates include Health Professionals; Construction Trades; Hairdressers; Artistic and Sports Occupations and Agricultural Occupations. In the US, the probabilities are higher the more educated a person is, while the opposite is true in Europe. Financial windfalls or housing capital gains are important explanatory variables for self-employment, through their ability to mitigate liquidity constraints. House  price  increases appear to be associated with increases in the self-employment rate. Most self-employed individuals in the UK work alone or in a partnership and do not have  any employees. They typically work longer hours than their employed counterparts, but generally earn less. There is, however, no evidence that in aggregate increases in self-employment affect growth in GDP, nor happiness, positively. At the very top end the successful entrepreneur earns considerably more than most wage and salary earners. The entrepreneur has a unique skill   he or she has created a job for him or herself and possibly even a job for others. The entrepreneur is an important engine for growth in the economy. Source: Labour Force Survey and various editions of the Employment Gazette Notes: These annual numbers are averages of quarterly data. Table 4. Survival rates of VAT registered enterprises up to 10 years, whole of UK Table 6. Self-employment in the United Kingdom as a % of total employment by industry Table 9. UK and US weighted self-employment rates by country of birth (ages 16-70), 2004-2006. Source: UK Labour Force Surveys, 2004-2006 and US Basic Monthly files of the Current Population Survey, 2004-2006 ###newline###  Notes: excluded categories; degree or equivalent; 2004; Corporate managers & senior officials; Tyne and Wear. T-statistics in parentheses. ###newline###  Source column 1: Eurobarometer Trend file 1975-2002 (ICPSR #4357). Notes: excluded category UK and Age left school at 14 or under. Source: column 2: Eurobarometer 64.4, Mental well-being, Telecommunications, Harmful Internet Content and Farm Animal welfare, December 2005-January 2006 (ICPSR #4667). Notes: excluded category UK and Age left school at 15 or under. T-statistics in parentheses. Sources: Column 1 1997/8 International Social Survey Programme and Blanchflower, Oswald and Stutzer  (2001).   Columns 2-4 Flash Eurobarometers 160 Entrepreneurship  5, Eurobarometer 83 Entrepreneurship 1, 2000. ZUMA German Archive ZA #4184; 4156; 3772; 3596 and 3498 (GESIS/ZA Central Archive for Empirical Social Research)  Notes: columns 1 and 2. Suppose you were working and could choose between different kinds of work. Which would you prefer being an employee or self-employed   tabulated here is % saying prefer being self employed. Column 3   do you strongly agree, agree, disagree, strongly disagree with the following opinion   it is difficult to start one s own business due to a lack of available financial support   tabulated here is the % who strongly agree Column 4   do you strongly agree, agree, disagree, strongly disagree with the following opinion   it is difficult to start one s own business due to the complex administrative procedures   tabulated here is the % who strongly agree Notes: excluded categories; no qualifications; Scotland and ten other labour market statuses from 1969 when the respondent was aged 11. T-statistics in parentheses ###newline###  To obtain some assessment of the child's perceptuo-motor ability. The child, on a specially designed form, is asked to make two attempts to copy each of six different shapes. A score of 0 or  1 is allocated for each attempt. The total score range is 0 to 12. Equations 1 & 2 include 29 country dummies. Countries are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, UK and USA. Equations 3 & 4 include 28 country dummies. Data for Switzerland are not available. T-statistics in parentheses. Self-employment is defined as all self-employed over total employment in columns 1 and 2 and as non-agricultural self-employed over total non-agricultural employment in columns 3 and 4. Employment is total numbers of employees. Notes: Austria; Belgium; Denmark; East Germany; Finland; France; Greece; Ireland; Italy; Luxembourg; Netherlands; Norway; Portugal; Spain; Sweden; West Germany.