 Thanks to Ida Hjortsoe, Tsveti Nenova and Jack Marston for their assistance in putting together these comments, and to Lewis Kirkham and Konstantinos Theodoridis for collaboration on the research paper underlying parts of these comments. Further thanks to Elizabeth Drapper, Lewis Kirkham, Clare Macallan, Gareth Ramsay, Marilyne Tolle, Alex Tuckett, and Jan Vlieghe for helpful suggestions. The views expressed here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Why are interest rates still near zero in so many countries   even though it has been almost nine years since the peak of the crisis? Why is so much monetary stimulus still believed to be needed   even as global economic growth has been above 3% for 7 years in a row and global inflation expected to pick up to about 3.5% by year end1?  Why are central banks so reticent to raise rates given their experience that interest rates at such low levels, especially for a prolonged period of time, can increase risks   such as fostering financial market bubbles and unsustainable borrowing, supporting an inefficient allocation of resources, and creating challenges for pension funds, savers and banks?2 Many other advanced economies have only eased monetary policy since the crisis. The bottom of Figure 1 shows some examples of countries where official interest rates have remained grounded   from the Czech Republic to Japan to Switzerland and, of course, the United Kingdom. Some of these countries have tried to lay the groundwork to get a lift-off on the calendar, but never got the rocket to the launch pad.  70 billion of government and corporate bond purchases announced in August. Granted, monetary policy was loosened in August in response to unique circumstances related to concerns about how the Brexit decision would impact the economy. But why was there no consensus to tighten monetary policy before then? And as the UK economy has held up well since the Brexit vote, why has there been no consensus to tighten monetary policy   or at least slightly reduce the substantial amount of stimulus provided in August   since then? A key justification for the large amount of stimulus that many people (albeit not me) supported in August was a forecast for a sharp contraction in growth to near recession levels and sharp increase in unemployment that would leave a meaningful increase in the number of people without a job. That forecast has not materialized. Instead, over the three full quarters since the referendum, GDP has increased by over three times more (by almost 1 percentage point more) than forecast in the August Inflation Report, and unemployment is 0.5 percentage points lower. Put slightly differently, instead of increasing, unemployment has fallen so much that it is now at its lowest level in over 40 years. At the same time, inflation spiked to 2.9% in May. It is expected to continue increasing over the next few months and remain above target for over three years. Why has there been no reduction in the substantial amount of emergency stimulus still being provided given that the sharp slowdown that motivated the emergency response has not materialized and inflation is well above target?  Although I have been voting to increase Bank Rate in the UK since March, and two of my colleagues on the MPC (Ian McCafferty and Michael Saunders), also voted to increase Bank Rate last week, a majority on the MPC does not support reversing a small portion of last August s stimulus (although Andy Haldane indicated in a speech yesterday that he was also considering this). Each member has valid arguments supporting their votes each month, but when taken together, the outcome is quite a change from the series of rate hikes that I had expected to occur over the last three years. This personal experience   combined with the failure of most major central banks to successfully  launch    raises the question that I will address today: Why has it been so hard to raise interest rates around the world from their emergency levels adopted during the crisis? I will focus on the experience of the UK, but many of the insights also apply to other economies around the world. My comments will begin by quickly discussing the obvious economic challenges to raising rates   arguments which have dominated most of the discussion: the fragile recovery (including headwinds from the crisis), the low natural rate of interest (including secular stagnation), and the series of  unfortunate events . All of these factors have undoubtedly played some role. The UK economy has faced no shortage of challenges. But an assessment of the key characteristics of the UK economy that are critical for monetary policy, including adjustments for structural changes that affect sustainable levels of growth, inflation, and unemployment, have led me to believe that these economic arguments are not the full reason why interest rates have not been raised even once since the crisis. In fact, in my view, a simple assessment of key variables suggests that although the UK may still require some support from monetary policy, the substantial amount that is in place today is not currently warranted by standard economic measures. It is increasingly difficult to make the case that fundamental economic weakness (whether couched in terms of secular stagnation, low r*, or a series of unfortunate events) is the main reason why it has been so hard to increase interest rates at all from emergency levels in the UK. There must be other factors at play. The second part of my comments will then shift to other factors that have received less attention: a series of ways in which the monetary policy process has fundamentally changed since the crisis and could raise the hurdle to increasing interest rates. I will discuss whether the new tools used by central banks (such as quantitative easing and macroprudential policy), expanded roles for central bankers (such as changes in their remits, greater emphasis on financial sector risks, greater public role, and greater demands on their time), and increased constraints on central banks (due to the lower bound and sensitivity of the exchange rate) may be complicating their ability to raise rates. This part of the discussion is more speculative and harder to measure concretely   but in my view   these factors have become increasingly important in explaining the  failure to launch  interest rates as the economic recovery has solidified. The final part of my comments will discuss another hypothesis   based on a new research paper with two colleagues at the Bank of England   Lewis Kirkham and Konstantinos Theodoridis.4 This analysis suggests that UK inflation dynamics may be more persistent than generally believed and less affected by many of the variables on which central bankers focus   such as inflation expectations and slack. This research also highlights the role of the exchange rate in meaningfully affecting the slow-moving and persistent component of UK inflation. Sterling s appreciation in 2014-2015 seems to have played a powerful role in dampening UK inflation, and thereby making it more difficult to launch a cycle of interest rate hikes until recently. But that cycle has now gone into reverse. Sterling s recent depreciation appears to be shifting the trend component of UK inflation upward quickly, potentially generating more persistent inflationary pressures and providing a powerful reason to raise interest rates now. My comments will conclude by evaluating how these different sets of factors that contributed to a  failure to launch  interest rates over the past three years have recently evolved, and if these factors continue to provide a reason to delay raising interest rates today. This evaluation suggests that although some of the reasons why it has been difficult to raise interest rates   especially the changes in the monetary policy process are likely to continue playing a role, other economic factors are moving in the opposite direction. Potentially most important, the powerful dampening effect on the persistent trend component of inflation from sterling s past appreciation has now gone into reverse. Instead, sterling is now creating a fairly persistent upward pressure on prices. In my view, if this is not countered soon by a moderate tightening in monetary policy, a  failure to launch  in the UK could soon generate even greater challenges than having a ###newline###  A central theme of many explanations for why advanced economies have had difficulty launching interest rates above the emergency levels adopted during the crisis is the fragility of the recovery and underlying economies. Put simply, the economies have not been strong enough to sustain growth around trend, unemployment around its natural rate, and inflation around target without continued, aggressive support from monetary policy. This could result from headwinds related to the crisis, the low natural rate of interest (which reduces the amount of stimulus from low interest rates), or simply a series of unfortunate economic events and challenges. I will quickly review each of these arguments   all of which have been made in detail elsewhere. But then I will make the case that although these factors have all played a role, they are unlikely to fully explain why interest rates have not been raised from emergency levels in countries such as the UK. One prominent set of arguments is that a series of  headwinds  that were induced by the crisis are holding back growth. This line of reasoning argues that monetary policy has needed to continue to be extremely supportive to provide a  tailwind  against these headwinds. There are many possible headwinds that could still be important   even though the peak of the crisis was almost 9 years ago. Reinhart and Rogoff (2014) show that severe banking crises weigh on economies for many years, with the countries in their sample taking an average of eight years for incomes just to recover to pre-crisis levels after a severe banking crisis. Even after this period, however, and after a financial system has largely healed, a financial crisis can leave other legacies that continue to hold back growth. Probably most important is the higher government debt accumulated during the crisis   a burden which requires tighter fiscal policy and thereby acts as a direct drag on growth.5 Another headwind could be lower productivity growth   whether resulting from lower levels of investment during the crisis, or from any reduced efficiency in the allocation of resources (see Borio et al., 2016). There could also be continued effects in the financial system influencing the demand for safe assets, and reduced credit and liquidity due to increased regulation aimed at reducing the risk of future crises.6 Consumers and workers scarred from the crisis could also continue to be more cautious   such as in their willingness to switch jobs or bargain for higher wages   possibly driving lower earnings growth.7 Any of these headwinds could persist for years after a financial crisis, continuing to drag on growth and justifying some degree of continued support from monetary policy. An extension of this argument that crisis-related headwinds are restraining growth is that the low interest rates adopted in response to the crisis are now generating their own set of headwinds   especially as rates have been so low for so long. For example, one issue that I ve been concerned about for years is that low interest rates can reduce the  churn  in an economy, an important (albeit often painful) process by which new and more efficient companies replace older, highly indebted, and less efficient companies.8 This  churn  has historically been an important driver of productivity growth   but has fallen notably in many developed countries. Another potential headwind from an extended period of low rates is abysmal returns for savers and pension funds.9 If consumers are  target savers  (meaning they adjust the amount they save to ensure a certain income stream), lower returns could cause them to increase savings and reduce spending   thereby slowing overall GDP growth.10 Similarly, companies whose pension funds are earning lower returns than expected could cut back investment and spending in other areas in order to replenish pensions   further slowing overall GDP growth.11 These arguments suggest that low interest rates could provide drags or headwinds to growth   especially if the low rates persist for an extended period   in addition to the other headwinds that are legacies of the crisis. Granted, the evidence suggests that the  tailwinds  from low rates supporting overall growth still outweigh the headwinds   but if these headwinds from low rates build over time (while the support from the initial easing of monetary policy fades over time), then the cumulative effects could imply somewhat slower growth that makes it even more challenging to increase interest rates over time. A closely related set of explanations for the combination of the slow recovery and low interest rates since the crisis is that the  natural rate of interest  (often called r* for short) has fallen.12 This r* is basically the level of real interest rates which should sustain growth around the economy s potential growth rate with inflation around target. If this has fallen, today s low interest rates are not providing nearly as much support to the economy as in the past (as the amount of stimulus corresponds to the size of the gap between r* and the main policy interest rate). If r* has fallen, interest rates would also not need to rise to levels anywhere near past averages   and may not even need to increase much at all to be at a new, lower equilibrium that implies neutral monetary policy.13 An extreme variant of this line of argument is that r* is so low that it causes  secular stagnation ; central banks cannot lower nominal rates (which cannot fall below zero) by enough below r* to provide the desired amount of economic stimulus to avoid stagnation.14 There is no doubt that r* has fallen over time. There is also little disagreement that this fall reflects changes in desired savings and investment around the world. Demographics have likely played an important role in the slow downward movement of r*, while factors related to the crisis (such as greater financial market regulation) and other longer-term trends may also have contributed to a more recent decline.15 But there are a number of ways to calculate r* (none of which is ideal) and quite a bit of disagreement about where the level actually is today in any country. There is even more disagreement on where it is heading in the next few years. With those caveats, Figure 2 shows recent calculations of r* for the US and UK since 1960.16 These graphs suggest that r* is much lower today in both countries than in the mid-2000s before the crisis, and the amount of stimulus provided by rates around 0.25% in the UK and 1.00%-1.25% in the US is much less than would have resulted from rates at those levels in 2005.17 Yet, even though today s low interest rates are not providing as much stimulus as they would have in the past, these calculations still suggest that rates in the UK are well below estimates of r*, and therefore monetary policy is providing a meaningful amount of stimulus today. But even if r* has been this low, I am not convinced by arguments that r* will stay around today s levels in the future. In fact, there are more convincing arguments why r* may already be beginning to increase   which suggests that keeping rates constant at their current low levels may already be providing more stimulus   instead of less. 18 I do not want to wade further into this already extensive debate on where r* is, why it is there, and where it is going. This is a topic on which far too much precision has already been claimed given the little we actually know and can calculate in real time. Instead, let me just quickly summarize how I think it matters for the key question of my comments today. While r* has fallen, and this implies that today s low rates are providing less stimulus than they would have in the past, I do not believe this is the main reason why rates have not been lifted in so many countries. This is especially true when trying to explain why rates have not been raised recently as inflation has picked up in most countries and r* might be beginning to rise. Higher inflation, combined with steady nominal policy rates, implies that central banks are providing more stimulus today, instead of starting to withdraw the emergency stimulus provided during the crisis. Another set of economic arguments for why interest rates have remained so low, without growth picking up more, focuses less on longer-term factors holding back growth, and instead on a  series of unfortunate events . This line of reasoning argues that advanced economies have been on the verge of strong recoveries and periods when they could successfully  launch  a series of sustained interest rate hikes   and then an external shock, increased risk of a major external event, or a political event provides reasons to delay. Although this is certainly not the whole explanation, and I can t remember when we lived in a period without surprises and shocks of some type or another, my experience on the Monetary Policy Committee over the last three years has made me sympathetic to these arguments. At the very least, there have been a number of times where increased global risks   or a configuration of global shocks   have been important considerations in my decision not to support an immediate increase in interest rates. Then oil prices began to fall and fall and fall some more. Other commodity prices followed suit. The fall in oil prices over the course of mid-2014 to start-2016 was the largest since the 1980s. This significantly reduced headline inflation in most countries around the world   and the effects were fairly extended as the declines in oil prices had several legs. In fact, the drag from lower oil prices that started in 2014 helped reduce inflation for over two years in the UK   with the effects still rolling off the price indices at the start of And whatever one s views are on the economic effects of these events, many of them   especially the elections   would have a clear resolution (at least to the immediate issue) on a specific date, after which there would be substantially more information on the economic outlook. I personally would not delay a needed increase in interest rates due to an upcoming political election. But when the case for raising interest rates is not urgent, there is little cost to delay a decision for a few weeks until a major result is known   especially if it could provide more certainty on key economic variables.  And even if policymakers try to ignore these influences they could affect firm and work decisions in ways that in turn affect the outlook for monetary policy. For example, concerns around Brexit may have made UK workers more hesitant to quit, switch jobs, and bargain for higher wages   as shown in Figure 5. This recent fall in quits around the Brexit referendum is quite striking, especially in the context of unemployment being at the lowest level in over 40 years and other evidence of robust labour demand. For someone who is uncertain about the case for adjusting monetary policy, these types of uncertainties around political events and how they might affect the economy can provide a reason for delaying an increase in interest rates. There is always the hope that next month brings more clarity. Although, more often than not, greater clarity on one dimension of the data usually occurs with a new puzzle arising in another dimension. Each of the arguments I just discussed for why growth has not been stronger and inflationary pressures have been subdued have some merit. The crisis has generated headwinds that slow economic growth and make the recovery more fragile; the natural rate of interest is lower today than before the crisis, and economies have experienced a number of short-term events and surprises that reduced inflationary pressures. But all of these arguments depend at least in part on the assumption that underlying economic growth and inflationary dynamics are too weak to support an increase in interest rates from emergency levels. And a simple look at the economic data suggests that this may not be true. Although major advanced economies certainly have economic challenges, and potential growth is lower than historic averages (if for no other reason than demographics), the key macroeconomic statistics central to monetary policy suggest that economies are as strong by many measures as they have traditionally been when monetary policy has been tightened. start of past tightening cycles. It is also worth noting that by the simplistic measures on these graphs, the UK economy is more clearly positioned for a tightening cycle than the US, at least relative to past decisions. These measures are not terribly informative for assessing the key variables relevant to monetary policy today, however, as the comparisons to historic averages do not capture structural changes in the economy which may change the thresholds by which to evaluate when tighter monetary policy is justified. For example, demographic changes and slower productivity growth have lowered the potential growth rate in the US and UK. Changes in the labour market have lowered the equilibrium unemployment rate. And slower productivity growth implies a lower rate of wage growth that would be consistent with keeping inflation around each country s target. A better comparison for this type of graph is where each variable is relative to the level consistent with maintaining inflation around the target. Figure 6b makes this comparison. It shows the same variables as before, but instead of showing what happened in past lift-offs or the historical average, it shows where each of the indicators is relative to estimates of the  potential  or  steady-state  value   basically the value believed to be consistent with supporting growth as strong as possible while keeping inflation around target sustainably. Since these numbers are not directly comparable to those from past hiking cycles, it graphs the  target  for each point in red (the estimated potential GDP growth rate, the natural unemployment rate as estimated by the MPC and the Fed respectively, the equilibrium growth in wages consistent with productivity growth at the average rate over the past 15 years and inflation at target, and the targets of 2% for inflation). The most recent value for each variable continues to be shown in blue. There is substantial uncertainty around exactly where these  targets  are (such as the debate on where the natural rate of unemployment is), but with this important caveat, the graphs in Figure 6b present a striking picture. The UK economy is clearly outperforming or close to equilibrium by every measure except wage growth   with headline inflation, core inflation, GDP growth, and unemployment around or above levels consistent with steady-state growth and inflation at target. This is not an economy that is too weak to support an increase in interest rates. Instead, it appears to be an economy that is  overstimulated  and where monetary policy has been set too loosely. In contrast, the US economy appears to be closer to a steady-state level by most variables   with GDP growth, unemployment, wage growth and headline inflation around steady-state levels, but core-inflation slightly lower.26 The bottom line: when considering the current structure of the economy and performance in the key variables critical for monetary policy, the US and UK are not doing badly. This is particularly true when considering the demographic changes which imply slower potential growth rates (as well as the structural changes which imply lower natural rates of unemployment). There are certainly economic challenges. The recovery from the crisis has been prolonged and extremely accommodative monetary policy has been an important part of the recovery. Some support from monetary policy is likely still warranted in the UK   and may be for some time. But the data suggest economies have recovered enough that a gradual reduction in the substantial stimulus in place is warranted. This argument appears to be even stronger for the UK than the US   where the UK is showing signs of being  behind the curve  in terms of adjusting monetary policy. As a result, it is increasingly difficult to make the case that fundamental economic weakness (whether couched in terms of secular stagnation, low r*, or a series of unfortunate events) is the main reason why it has been so hard to increase interest rates at all from emergency levels. There must be other factors at play. ###newline###  If it is not purely economic developments holding back a launch of interest rates from emergency levels, could characteristics of the policy environment and policy process be important? Monetary policy has fundamentally changed in many ways since the crisis   including new tools for central banks (such as quantitative easing and macroprudential tools), expanded roles for central bankers (such as greater emphasis on financial sector risks, more transparency and accountability, and greater political attention), and increased constraints on central banks (due to the zero lower bound and sensitivity of the exchange rate). This section will explore if these changes in the policy environment may be making it more difficult, or less necessary, to increase interest rates over the past few years as the economy has strengthened. Macroprudential instruments provide another example of how the expanded toolkit of central banks may be taking the burden off adjusting interest rates 32. In some cases, macroprudential tools could be used to address concerns which might otherwise have contributed to a decision to tighten monetary policy (such as rapid credit growth or vulnerabilities related to an overheating property market)33. Although the desirability of raising interest rates to address credit concerns or vulnerabilities in certain sectors (such as housing), is a controversial topic34, these concerns often factor into monetary policy discussions. For example, Australia was the second central bank in an advanced economy (after Israel) to begin increasing interest rates after the crisis, and raised them 7 times before reversing course and reducing them to an even lower rate. There were a number of reasons why Australia tightened monetary policy so aggressively   including a robust economy by many measures. Australia is also a central bank that does not have control over the major macroprudential tools and cited concerns about the  unsustainable growth  in dwelling prices and  build-up of other imbalances in the economy  as factors behind its rate increase decisions. It is impossible to know the counterfactual, but if Australia (and other central banks who also lacked macroprudential tools) had more potent use of policies other than interest rates, could they have used those other tools to address their concerns and not increased interest rates as aggressively? An even clearer example of how macroprudential policy can reduce incentives to increase interest rates comes from my own experience at the Bank of England. In 2014, UK house prices were increasing rapidly and consumer borrowing to finance home purchases was accelerating to levels that could indicate future vulnerabilities.35 Bank exposure to housing-related loans was growing at rates that were starting to generate concerns. One response to these types of risks could have been to raise interest rates. The economy was strong enough that an increase in rates soon was already part of the discussion   and if these risks related to the housing market and debt accumulation were not addressed   they would have strengthened the case to move sooner.36 But instead, the Financial Policy Committee at the Bank of England tightened macroprudential policy to reduce future risks from housing-related debt in the banking sector. Although I wouldn t want to speak for the rest of the Monetary Policy Committee, for me this somewhat reduced the urgency behind one reason to raise rates, providing more time to evaluate whether other economic developments justified tighter monetary policy. Just as central banks have a larger set of tools today than before the crisis37, they also have a larger set of responsibilities. And by responsibilities, I mean not just over economic and financial variables, but also in terms of transparency and to the broader public.38 These larger and more demanding roles, especially when combined with changes in their remits, could, in some cases, make it more difficult to raise rates. In the past, advanced economy central banks primarily focused (some might say myopically) on inflation. Granted, different institutions had somewhat different mandates   with some focused on keeping inflation around or below a target (such as the ECB), some focused on keeping inflation symmetrically around a target (such as the BoE) and some focused on maintaining  maximum employment as well as stable prices  (such as the US Federal Reserve). Although the frameworks differed, there was no doubt that maintaining low inflation was at the core of every central banks  remit. Over the last decade, however, the remits of several major central banks have been expanded to incorporate risks to the financial sector and broader financial stability, often in conjunction with new tools to accomplish this broader mandate. Prominent examples include the Norges Bank and, closer to home, the Bank of England.39 This major change in the responsibilities of the Bank of England was made in the Financial Services Act of 2012.40 This act created an independent Financial Policy Committee (focused on Moreover, as the formal remits of major central banks have expanded in these types of ways over the past few years, the expectations for transparency and the public role played by those leading these institutions has also grown.45 Think back to the days of Montagu Norman, the Governor of the Bank of England from 1920 to 1944, who is often cited as saying that the role of a central banker was:  Never explain, never apologise . The Bank not only avoided press conferences and hearings before the Treasury Select Committee, but would not even announce changes in interest rates.46 Central bankers believed that too much talk and public discourse would cause unnecessary volatility in markets, and discussing their actions could tie their hands in the future. The world has certainly changed. Sebastian Mallaby s brilliant book Greenspan: The Man Who Knew documents how Alan Greenspan developed from a young, data-obsessed economic analyst to one of the most talented political players and influential figures in the United States. His political skills were so sophisticated, that he supposedly even outwitted Henry Kissinger   one of the world s premier political strategists   in a disagreement about an oil deal with Iran. The book also raises serious questions about whether Greenspan might have been more proactive in addressing vulnerabilities that contributed to the Global Financial Crisis if he had been less concerned about his political popularity. and public protests. He faced discontent in the form of two-by-four planks mailed to his office from bankrupt homebuilders, keys of unsold vehicles sent from struggling carmakers, and farmers driving their tractors to Washington and creating a blockade around the Fed s headquarters.47 Can you imagine a central banker today facing that type of ire? Central bankers can no longer hide behind their thick stone walls as they are now regularly interacting with people throughout the country. And even if central bankers today were willing to make decisions that put them in this extremely unpopular position   would there be pressure for them to resign from their jobs? While at the Bank of England, I have not seen any evidence of the Government pressuring any MPC member to adjust their stance to support government policy. But there have been other voices calling for central bank governors to resign for actions that do not seem to have caused nearly as much economic distress as the increases in foreclosures and unemployment during Volcker s era.48 The fact that central bankers today have a broader set of issues that they are held responsible for in their remits, are more transparent about their decisions, and play a more public role, does not mean that they are making the wrong decisions. Instead, moving past the era of  never apologise, never explain  to having to publicly explain decisions and meet with a broad set of constituents has undoubtedly improved the decision making process. Nonetheless, there are also ways in which these changes may have made it more difficult to raise interest rates. More specifically, as central banks have seen their remit expanded to include a broader set of considerations and have played a more public role, this could make them more hesitant to  take away the punch bowl  and make the difficult decisions that can be required to keep inflation stable. In the UK, changes to the BoE s remit explicitly require a consideration of the trade-offs involved in deciding the speed with which inflation is returned sustainably to target. Central bankers may place more weight on supporting the economy today and worry less about future risks related to low interest rates and high inflation if they are constantly on the firing line for the current state of the economy   including for issues other than inflation. As Thomas Hoenig (the former President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City) recently worried:  In a world of discretionary policy, when the moment comes to choose between long-run goals and short-term effects, policymakers experience enormous pressure to choose the more expedient short-run solution, deferring to another time concern with the long-run implications. 49 Put slightly differently, do central bankers today put more weight on how tighter monetary policy could affect unemployment during their term and less on the costs of low interest rates in the future? Or given their more public roles, do central bankers today worry more about what could go wrong around the times that rates were tightened even if any problems were not related to the increase in rates   knowing that they will be blamed nonetheless? As central bankers consider a broader range of economic and political concerns, Could this greater focus on risks have created an asymmetry in our monetary policy responses? Over my term on the MPC, we have been much quicker to adjust monetary policy in response to downside risks than upside. We adopted a large stimulus package in August due to concerns that the economy might weaken substantially   not waiting for hard data. Then the economy outperformed for much of a year, yet today a majority of the Committee still does not support a recalibration of this stimulus. Granted a greater focus on downside risks   and willingness to respond to them   has made sense over the last few years given risks around deflation, the lower bound, and secular stagnation   as I discussed earlier. But as I also discussed earlier, these risks have receded. And the August stimulus package has confirmed the power of quantitative easing as a policy tool even when interest rates are near zero. It is disconcerting that 1-year-1-year forward rates have become so much less responsive to positive news surprises in the UK, such that staff estimates indicate their sensitivity to positive events is insignificant today   the first time since end-2008. Also, even if this greater focus on risks and willingness to respond to risks has not been a key factor weighing on interest rate decisions, there is also the fundamental issue of time constraints. In the past, monetary policy was the key focus of most members of monetary policy committees (MPCs). Now, some members of the Bank of England s MPC spend a substantial amount of time on other Committees and focusing on other mandates. For example, the Governor and Deputy Governors at the Bank of England now also sit on the Financial Policy Committee and Prudential Regulatory Committee. As an external member of the MPC, I only have the responsibility to one committee   and there are some weeks that it is hard to keep up with just that workload. Even for people who work extremely long hours, there are only so many hours in a day. One way to illustrate how this wider set of responsibilities may be affecting the focus of MPC members is to look at the topics of their public speeches. In the three years before the FPC was launched (from 2010 to 2012), about 70% of the speeches given by internal MPC members (excluding the Governor) were at least partly on monetary policy. In the three years after the FPC was operating (from 2014 to 2016), only about 55% of the speeches by the same group included a discussion of monetary policy. In sharp contrast, external members   who do not sit on other committees   maintained their exclusive focus on monetary policy. About 98% of the speeches of external MPC members discussed monetary policy   in both the 2010 to 2012 as well as the 2014 to 2016 periods. Of course, the fact that internal MPC members are focusing on issues other than monetary policy can also bring benefits   such as putting monetary policy decisions in a broader context. But as with any issue, there may also be costs. Moreover, even if talented officials keep up with all of the issues relevant to all the committees on which they sit, there is little chance for those with a myriad of responsibilities to pursue their own thinking or analysis on issues specific to monetary policy   making it harder to challenge the baseline analysis presented by staff. This may make it more challenging for full committees to thoughtfully consider different approaches and points of view. As potential evidence of this, Figure 10a graphs all dissenting votes on the MPC since it started in 1998. Dissenting votes by both internal and external members are not unusual in the earlier years of the MPC.50 Over the first 16 years that the MPC was operating (from 1998 through 2013), about 10% of the total votes were dissents from the majority, reflecting a healthy range of views. Internal MPC members were a key part of this range of views   with about 34% of the dissenting views over this period cast by internals. Even the Governor was outvoted on several occasions (as shown in the yellow parts of the bars). This pattern of robust debate by all committee members continued during the tumultuous period from 2007 through 2013   a period when there may have been more pressure for internal management to show a united front given the heightened risk around the global financial crisis and euro crisis   with 30% of dissenting votes still continuing to come from internals. This pattern of different views and dissent by all types of committee members, however, seems to have changed around 2013   a period when there were a number of changes at the Bank and to the MPC s remit, making it hard to pinpoint the cause. From 2014 onwards, there have been 26 non-consensus votes, 3% of all votes cast. This lower rate of dissent could reflect changes in the economy that have made monetary policy decisions straightforward and non-controversial over this period although given the sharp undershoot and now overshoot of inflation over much of this window   it is hard to believe this is the entire explanation. What is even more striking is changes in the pattern of where the dissents come from. Not a single dissent since 2013 has come from an internal member.51 This is a sharp change from before 2013, when dissents were spread across external members, internal members, and even at times the Governor. It is hard to identify exactly what has driven the change. The year 2013 was when the FPC was created   substantially adding to the workload of the members of the MPC that also sat on the FPC. The year 2013 was when the remit of the MPC was changed to incorporate a greater consideration of trade-offs and the speed with which inflation was returned to target. There were also a number of changes in the composition of the committee (with a new Governor, three new deputy governors, and a new chief economist over the course of 2013 and 2014). These comparisons are also on very small sample sizes, so changes in voting patterns could simply reflect changes in committee membership from year to year   especially of any individual external member who frequently had minority opinions. Figure 10b breaks down the number of dissenting votes by internals and externals by meeting (instead of year), however, and suggests that these changes do not just reflect changes in individual membership   such as just one or two individuals who consistently voted in a minority leaving or joining the committee. Instead, this shift in patterns seems to reflect a more fundamental change in the committee. All except one of the 26 non-consensus votes since 2013 have also been for tighter monetary policy than the consensus.52 To summarize, this discussion is not intended to imply that anyone is making a decision for political reasons or making the wrong decision. Instead, the main lesson that I draw is that changes in the institutional structure of central banks, including changes in their remits, the increased expectations for central bankers, and the increased demands on their time, may have shifted their focus and risk assessments in the portion of their role relevant to monetary policy. These institutional changes may provide substantial benefits for the central bank as a whole and overall economy, but these changes may also have played a role in making it more difficult to increase interest rates. A final way in which the policy environment for central bankers has fundamentally changed in ways that could make it harder to raise interest rates is the way in which the standard tool   of adjusting rates   works. More specifically, are adjustments to interest rates more challenging given the constraints of the effective-lower bound and the sensitivity of the exchange rate? I ll begin with one issue raised in this context   mainly as I believe it is easy to dismiss. With nominal interest rates in so many countries near zero, it has been argued that central banks are  out of ammunition . If the neutral rate of interest (r*, as discussed above) remains low, then central banks will continue to have less room to manoeuvre through adjusting interest rates as they will remain closer to their effective lower bounds. Risk assessment   and formal models   suggest that it may therefore make sense to be more cautious in raising interest rates today as you will have less ability to respond in the future to negative shocks. Although there is some merit to these arguments, they implicitly assume that central banks will  run out of ammunition  and are unable to ease policy through tools other than interest rates. And recent experience suggests this is not true  at least for the UK. Although adjusting interest rates is my preferred means for adjusting monetary policy, there is now a body of evidence showing that other tools   such as quantitative easing   can provide meaningful economic stimulus.53 The quantitative easing programs and Term Funding Scheme adopted by the Bank of England in August seemed to not only be effective, but have even larger immediate effects than expected   at least to the best that we can measure.54 A more important constraint on raising interest rates, however, and one that interacts with low interest rates, is the constraint resulting from exchange rate movements in this globalized world. If the increased possibility of an increase in interest rates causes an exchange rate to appreciate, and a stronger exchange rate, in turn, tightens financial conditions and slows exports and demand, then it may no longer be as urgent to raise interest rates. In some sense, the tightening of monetary policy could happen without the policy rate even being tightened. And this is more likely to occur in a world such as today when interest rates in so many countries are at record low levels, so perceived  tightening  happens more through guidance and language than actual adjustments in rates. Put slightly differently, the  impossible trilemma , which already made it difficult for small, open-economies to adjust monetary policy to address domestic imbalances, may have become even more difficult in this era of interest rates near zero.55 I realize that there are many caveats and  ifs  in this line of reasoning   but my experience at the Bank of England suggests that these effects may be important. For example, consider the UK s experience in 2014. As shown in Figure 11a, market expectations were for the MPC to increase interest rates soon   not only before the FOMC, but well before the ECB (where rates were expected to remain near zero for at least 2 years). This expectation helped drive a sharp appreciation of sterling (shown in Figure 11b)   by more than 20% between March 2013 and August 2015. This appreciation, in turn, led to tighter financial conditions, lower net exports, and a sharp fall in import prices. All of these contributed to lower inflation.  Figure 11c shows the estimates I made of this effect in my first speech on the MPC, in October 2014.56 It suggests that if sterling had not appreciated so sharply, inflation would have been well above target and I likely would have been voting for an increase in interest rates. Moreover, in more recent work with two bank colleagues, we show that when exchange rate movements are driven more by monetary policy, they tend to have larger effects on prices than when the exchange rate moves for other domestic reasons.57 Figure 11d shows our estimates for how much larger the effect of a monetary-policy induced exchange rate movement can be   with a given exchange rate appreciation driven entirely by changes in monetary policy predicted to have more than twice as large a drag on prices than if the exchange rate movement was driven by other domestic factors (such as supply or demand shocks or changes in risk premia). These types of large effects   of expected changes in monetary policy on the exchange rate and then on inflation   could in turn make it harder to carry through and change monetary policy. To take these arguments one step further, these exchange rate effects (and their corresponding constraints on adjusting monetary policy) may have increased over time due to changes in the global environment. Globalization often implies that small changes in the exchange rate have larger effects on the broader economy through capital flows and trade, especially in an open economy, such as the UK.58 And these effects could have been aggravated over the last few years as so many countries have interest rates near zero   such that any small changes in rates have disproportionately larger effects. Some interesting internal work at the Bank of England suggests that the relationship between relative rates and sterling is significantly greater when there is an increase in rates (compared to a decrease), and that the effect has trebled since the UK policy rate hit the effective lower bound. An interesting new BIS paper finds that exchange rates in a broader set of countries have become significantly more sensitive to monetary policy over time, and that the foreign exchange impact of changes in monetary policy is greater, the lower are rates 59. Put slightly differently, in this era of low rates, a greater share of the adjustment from changes in monetary policy works through exchange rates, and since the exchange rate effects complement those that are the goal of monetary policy, they can subsequently make it less necessary to actually raise interest rates. ###newline###  Let me back up and explain what I mean by a different channel than in our standard models of inflation dynamics. Most inflation forecasts   used by the majority of economists as well as central banks such as the Bank of England   rely heavily on models that assume slack and inflation expectations are the key drivers of inflation dynamics (often based on some type of Phillips curve relationship). These basic concepts are developed formally in DSGE models that incorporate a complex set of structural relationships. In a recent paper with two colleagues at the Bank of England (Lewis Kirkham and Konstantinos Theodoridis), however, we argue that a very different approach to understanding and modelling inflation dynamics can provide important insights for the UK.60 This  trendy  analysis takes a more a theoretical approach than in the standard DSGE models and focuses on the time-series in order to understand what drives movements in the slow-moving trend rate of inflation. This approach provides information on when movements in inflation away from a target are likely to be short-lived, and when they are likely to be more persistent   and therefore can provide important insights for setting monetary policy. More specifically, we show how UK inflation can be separated empirically into two components: a slow-moving trend and short-term movements around this trend.61 Figure 12 shows the resulting decomposition of UK headline and core CPI inflation since 1984   with the more persistent trend component of inflation in blue, and the shorter-lived, cyclical component in red. This breakdown confirms that cyclical movements have been a key driver of inflation dynamics during certain periods   such as during the period of high inflation in the late-1980s/early-1990s and during the commodity price booms of 2007/08 and 2010/2011. But the slow-moving trend (in blue) also plays an important role in driving overall inflation as well as its movements   explaining about 39% of the variation in headline inflation and 46% in core inflation since 1984. What is perhaps most striking, however, are several periods since the mid-1990s when trend inflation moved sharply and has been a key factor driving inflation away from 2%. This is particularly evident over the past few years. The recent movement is so striking that I have broken out the estimates of this trend rate of inflation for both the headline and core CPI in separate graphs (Figure 13). I ve also included dashed lines showing the 10th and 90th percentiles of these estimates (basically where we can say the estimated trend is with 80% confidence). The estimated trends of both headline and core inflation have fluctuated well away from the 2% inflation target over the past decade  and recently picked up quite sharply. For example, the trend of headline inflation troughed at 0.6% in 2015 and has recently picked up to reach 2.4% in the 2nd quarter of 2017.62 And although movements in core inflation tend to be smaller, the estimated trend of core inflation has fluctuated from a recent low of 1.5% in 2015 to just above 2% in 2017. dynamics. Across a range of specifications, international prices are important determinants of the short-term cyclical movements in UK inflation around its trend, and the sterling exchange rate is an important determinant of movements in the more persistent trend in inflation. These relationships are not only significant, but economically meaningful and robust to a range of specifications. For example, using the paper s baseline estimates, the roughly 20% sterling depreciation in the year to October 2016 (in the run-up A second, and related conclusion, is that UK domestic variables at the core of the popular DSGE models of inflation dynamics, such as slack and inflation expectations, seem to play a less important role, especially when explaining the dynamics of core inflation. Even in the specifications when slack and inflation expectations are estimated to be significant, the magnitudes of their estimated relationships with UK inflation tend to be much smaller than those for international prices and the exchange rate.63 This implies that if the economy starts around steady-state with trend inflation around the 2% target, and then a moderate exchange rate movement drives the slow-moving trend rate of inflation in one direction, it would take a very substantial movement in slack or inflation expectations to offset this impact of sterling and return inflation to the 2% target. In contrast, the fall in the trend component of inflation corresponding to sterling s appreciation had different implications. This effect was likely to be more persistent, and provided a reason not to  lift off  interest rates. Monetary policy could remain more accommodative than it otherwise would have because of this persistent sterling-induced drag   despite the reduction in slack to what was believed to be close to zero at the time. The very low level of slack and continued growth momentum were expected to continue to push up on inflation and close this output gap over time   but these effects of economic activity on inflation would work slowly and be small in magnitude   so it made sense to delay an increase in interest rates until the trend rate of inflation was close to 2%. This combination of factors could have contributed to the myriad of other factors discussed above to justify not launching interest rates off post-crisis levels ..at least until recently . ###newline###  Does this continued delay in increasing Bank Rate make sense? To answer this question, it is useful to review the three categories of reasons I ve discussed for why interest rates have not been raised over the past three years   including before the Brexit vote.  Do the same factors preventing a  lift-off  then still explain the MPC s majority decision last week to keep interest rates constant (a majority decision which three members, including myself, voted against)? Can these factors justify a continuation of the full stimulus package announced last August? just over half of the measures of domestically-generated inflation (DGI) that I follow are at or above levels consistent with inflation at target. My preferred measure of domestic inflation (an inverse-variance-weighted average of DGI measures which puts less weight on the more volatile components of domestic inflation that bounce around from month to month) is now at 2.2%. When adjusting for trends in underlying core goods inflation, service inflation is now at or above levels consistent with inflation sustainably at target.64 Granted, soft wage growth points in the other direction, but an assessment of domestic inflation should involve measures broader than just wages. It is also important to remember that it is not simply wage growth   but the broader measure of unit labour costs   which is most relevant to assess the domestic labour costs feeding through to headline inflation. If productivity growth remains subdued, then wage growth will not need to increase by much   and certainly not to pre-crisis levels   to be consistent with sustaining headline inflation around 2%. Moreover, a key lesson from monetary history is that a tightening cycle should start before wages accelerate to reach their level consistent with sustainable 2% inflation   why we spend so much time trying to estimate slack and output gaps. Different people may focus on different economic variables when evaluating the UK economy. Different people can interpret the same data and variables in different ways that make them more cautious about increasing rates. Some people may worry about the strength of the economy today, and others about the economic outlook, especially given the myriad of uncertainties related to the Brexit negotiations. Any of these assessments could support a case not to increase interest rates today. But could there also be other factors contributing to the lack of any  lift-off  in the UK? In the middle of my comments, I discussed another set of reasons   reasons related to how the monetary policy process has changed over the last decade. It is harder to quantify these effects, but my sense is that they have played, and will continue to play, some role in raising the hurdle to increase interest rates. These factors include the broader  toolkit  of some central banks   such as macroprudential policies   which can now be adjusted instead of interest rates as a way to tighten financial conditions. The broader mandate of some central banks, changes to their remits, and the greater political attention they receive, could make it more difficult to  take away the punch bowl  by increasing interest rates   especially when compared to the period when members of Monetary Policy Committees had more time to narrowly focus on meeting their single mandate of the inflation target. There is also some evidence that exchange rates have become more sensitive to adjustments in monetary policy, possibly making it harder to  lift off , as any such discussion causes sterling to appreciate and financial conditions to tighten without ever getting interest rates off the ground. These changes to how monetary policy works are likely to continue. Many of these changes could also provide substantial benefits (such as the coordinated use of macroprudential and monetary policy tools)   but they could also make it somewhat more difficult to increase interest rates than previously. But this last set of arguments for not increasing interest rates no longer applies. Instead, it has gone into reverse. Sterling s roughly 20% depreciation since the fall of 2015 is pushing the slow moving trend in inflation up, instead of down. Updated estimates suggest that this persistent component of headline inflation has now picked up to reach 2.4%. Given the long-lasting nature of movements in trend inflation, this type of movement in trend inflation away from 2% would normally require a monetary policy response. Granted, there may be times when any such effects of sterling on inflation are partially balanced by other variables   such as the degree of slack in the economy or changes in inflation expectations. But the empirical estimates in Forbes, Kirkham and Theodoridis (2017) suggest that since the effect of exchange rate movements on trend inflation is substantially larger than that of other variables, a material amount of slack or fall in inflation expectations would be required to fully balance the impact of a moderate fall in sterling on trend inflation. Given that inflation expectations have risen instead of fallen, and given that there is little slack in the economy and most evidence suggests it will continue to fall (instead of rise), the conditions to ignore the overshoot of trend inflation in this framework are not in place. This combination of results suggests that, in my view, the  lift-off  of UK interest rates should not be delayed any longer. Many of the factors that have justified keeping interest rates at emergency levels over the past few years have become less potent, and sterling s depreciation has fundamentally shifted underlying inflation dynamics in a way that makes it more pressing to begin this voyage soon. Granted, there are changes in the monetary policy process that may still slow this launch, especially given concerns about the broader evolution of the economy as it adjusts to new arrangements with its most important trading partner. These concerns reinforce the case to make any adjustments in monetary policy limited and gradual. For me, however, these risks also highlight the need to make monetary policy more nimble   both today and in the future. We should be less hesitant to adjust interest rates   in either direction   as the situation changes. Engineers are quick to adjust a launch date if there is a technical concern or if the weather shifts. We should do the same. Otherwise, the UK economy may face greater challenges than parents face when their Forbes, Kristin, Reinhardt, Dennis and Wieladek, Tomasz. (2017). "The spillovers, interactions, and (un)intended consequences of monetary and regulatory policies." Journal of Monetary Economics, Elsevier, vol. 85(C), pages 1-22. Reinhart, Carmen and Rogoff, Kenneth. (2014). "Recovery from Financial Crises: Evidence from 100 Episodes." American Economic Review, 104(5): 50-55.