 David Blanchflower, Bruce V. Rauner Professor, Dartmouth College, University of Stirling, IZA, CESifo, NBER and Member, Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England I am delighted to be able to make this speech in support of so worthy a cause as the Esm e Fairbairn foundation, one of the largest independent grant making foundations in the UK. The Esm e Fairbairn Foundation provides grants to organisations which aim to improve the quality for life for people and communities in the UK, and the foundation's work is particularly important in that it often considers work that others find hard to fund, either because it breaks new ground, appears too risky, requires  core funding or needs a more unusual form of financial help such as a loan. I have to admit (and this may not come as a surprise to those who know my background as a labour economist) that I am particularly interested in the work the Esm e Fairbairn Foundation does in promoting enterprise and independence. At a microeconomic level, supply-side initiatives to help people to help themselves provides a sure-fire route out of poverty and social exclusion. At a macroeconomic level, such initiatives produce positive labour market outcomes by making the workforce more flexible and increasing skills, thereby increasing the efficiency of the labour market, and boosting economic growth. One sector of society that has traditionally suffered from social exclusion is immigrants - indeed this is sometimes seen as a reason why the rate of self employment tends to be higher among immigrants than the indigenous population. For today's talk I am going to look at a specific group of recent arrivals - namely workers from the EU Accession Countries - and consider their impact on the UK labour market and on the wider economy. Migration has been one of the key areas of economic debate in the UK over the past few years. We have all been exposed to stories of Eastern European migrants moving en masse to the UK, ready to work longer hours and for less money than Britons.  And there is some truth to these stories. But I believe these flows have been very  good for the UK economy, not bad as some would have us believe. As a backdrop to this discussion, I d like to briefly characterise what has been happening to the UK labour market over the last couple of years or so. This has heavily influenced my voting behaviour on the MPC, and given rise to my reputation for being a  dove , because I believe that there is considerably more slack in the labour market at present than is popularly held to be the case. The inactivity rate fell when unemployment was rising but has recently increased alongside the fall in unemployment. This increasingly looks like a discouraged worker effect where workers withdraw from the labour force in recessions when they can't find jobs. There have been very few employee jobs created. Indeed over the last 12 months the number fell by 1000. There have been strong increases in temporary workers who can t find permanent jobs and part-timers who can t find full-time jobs. The number of self-employed has grown at a rate that has never been seen in the past and is clearly unsustainable in the future. One need only compare the data for the UK to that of the EU and the US to see the significance of this change. In a recent paper (Blanchflower and Shadforth 2007a) I argued that at least half of that increase had to do with rising house prices freeing up capital constraints. Even though there has apparently been strength on the demand side based on reports from business pricing surveys, wage growth has been muted. I have been arguing that this is the dog that hasn t and will not bark for some time now. This can be seen from the series on average earnings (chart 1) and on wage settlements (chart 2). The fact that wages have been flat remains a puzzle principally to those who believe demand is booming and the labour market is tight. So who has come? Table 2 helps us characterise the flows of people from the A8 as follows: The biggest numbers have come from Poland   to this point approx 400,000. The smallest numbers have come from Slovenia. These numbers are taken from the Worker Registration scheme   numbers from National Insurance records are even larger. The highest numbers in terms of proportion of the home population that have come are from Lithuania and Latvia. Workers from countries with lower GDP per head, such as Lithuania are more likely to be registered on the UK WRS than those from countries with higher GDP, such as Slovenia. It is well known that East Europeans are especially likely to report that they are unhappy. It turns out that the propensity to migrate is even more highly correlated with happiness and life satisfaction than it is with GDP per capita (Blanchflower et al). The lower the level of happiness the greater the propensity to migrate. Table 3 shows that there has been some improvement in the life satisfaction scores in a number of these Eastern European countries since accession in 2004, particularly in the Czech Republic; Hungary; Latvia; Lithuania and especially Slovakia. The increase in happiness might suggest a reduction in the flows in the future. Over time the life satisfaction scores and the GDP levels with repatriation of funds lowers the subsequent probability of people coming as does other countries opening their borders. The OECD (2006) has recently projected that GDP will grow particularly rapidly in both Poland and Slovakia over the next couple of years. The OECD projects a growth rate of around 8% in Slovakia in 2007, and 5% in Poland, where, it suggests remittances from migrants will sustain consumption. The other member of the OECD is Hungary, which is projected to grow by just 2% in 2007. Rapid GDP growth in some A10 countries and improvements in their unemployment rates might suggest a reduction in the flows of both permanent migrants and especially temporary workers to the UK from the A10 countries in the future. The typical new arrival from Eastern Europe who has come to work in the UK can be characterised as follows. He (for it tends to be he, not she) tends to be young, educated and unmarried. Approximately one third work for recruitment agencies. They disproportionately work in East Anglia and the West and East Midlands in low- paid, non-unionised jobs in agriculture, hospitality and catering. Holding constant a variety of characteristics including age, qualifications and location, A10 workers have higher self-employment rates, lower wages and have higher employment to population ratios than natives. Interestingly, the World Bank (2007) addressed the issue of the mobility of the young in its recent World Development Report. They found that the propensity to migrate increases over the teenage years peaking in the early twenties in many destination countries, such as Spain and the United States. Hence, young people make up a  higher proportion of the flow of international migrants than the stock. Young people are likely to face lower costs of moving and have higher lifetime returns. The World Bank notes that when the only legal options for the young are through high-skilled immigration, categories requiring tertiary education or substantial job experience, migrants are less likely to be young. figure 8.5). A high proportion of such moves would not then conform to the UN recommended definition of a migrant as an individual who changes their country of residence for at least one year. What has caused this wave of immigration? The data indicate that these individuals have come to work   they have not come to claim benefits. Indeed, by 2007Q1, only 744 applications for income support had been approved; 1,858 applications for income based Jobseeker s Allowance were approved; 46 applications for state pension credit, and 1,992 applications for homelessness assistance had been allowed to proceed. There have only been 235 local authority lettings to A8 workers in England. It seems that, explicitly or implicitly, each individual has made a cost/benefit calculation and decided that given the relative propensities for employment, and the prevailing wages in their home and destination countries, that working abroad will provide them and their families with a better life. And who could blame them? The UK has enjoyed a very low level of unemployment for many years, much lower than the unemployment rates in any of the A8 countries, and wages are significantly higher here too. But other EU15 countries have low unemployment and higher wages, so why have many migrants chosen to come to the UK? The primary reason reflects the limited opportunities available in other EU countries following enlargement. Only the UK, Ireland and Sweden opened their borders fully to individuals from the A8 countries in 2004. Many of the other EU15 members have subsequently alleviated some restrictions on the free movement of Eastern European workers, but the UK remains one of the few whose borders are fully open. As such, A8 workers have had little choice in terms of their opportunities. Can the UK accommodate these immigrants? What are the implications for the UK? According to official estimates published by the Office for National Statistics, the UK population grew by just 8.2% between 1971 and 2006, from 55.9 million to 60.5 million (chart 3). In contrast, the United States population grew by 44.6% over the same period. Indeed population growth across most advanced countries has been greater than in the UK over the past three decades. Over the period 1971-2004, population growth in the UK ranks 31st out of 38 European and other large nations for which data are available with only Germany (East and West) and seven East  European countries having had slower population growth. All the other major industrialised nations have had faster rates of population growth. Since UK  population growth appears to have been extremely low by international standards over the past three decades it would seem likely that the UK has the capacity to absorb a reasonably large number of immigrants without too many undesirable consequences. ###newline###  We can identify the characteristics of those individuals who are most fearful about losing their job by modeling the responses to this question across the available countries. We find that the fear of unemployment is higher the longer a job has been held, controlling for characteristics such as age, gender, schooling, immigrant, type of contract, years of job tenure, private sector along with country dummies. It is also apparent that fear is lower for the more educated, for those on indefinite contracts, full-timers and those who work in the public sector. These results are as we might expect. We can also model the direct impact  fear  of unemployment has on earnings. We control for similar characteristics as before, these being pretty much standard for  wage equations; additional controls are added for days and hours worked. The results confirm that the  fear  of unemployment lowers wages. Also, and perhaps somewhat unsurprisingly, the measure we use to proxy for fear of unemployment becomes more significant (i.e. the fear rises) for those who  strongly agree  that they are likely to be made unemployed in the next six months. The effects appear to be large. Charts 4-6 plot three-month averages of the survey balances against the actual unemployment rate for the UK, EU-15 and Ireland respectively. The survey balances have been advanced 12 months, to make comparisons between what individuals expected and the actual unemployment outturns clearer. Chart 4 shows that fear of unemployment and actual unemployment have risen over the past few years in the UK   consistent with a larger pool of workers being available to firms, but demand for workers not increasing by as much. Chart 5 shows that the fear of unemployment has declined in the Euro Area since 2003/4. Interestingly, the survey balances fell in Austria; Belgium; Denmark; Finland; France; Germany; Luxembourg; the Netherlands; Portugal and Sweden since mid-2003.  The main exceptions are the UK Chart 6 reports the survey balance and unemployment rate in Ireland, which is the only other major country in the EU that has experienced a big increase in migration from the A10. This shows a similar story to the UK. Ireland s population increased  by 313,000, or 8.1%, between 2002 and 2006. Of this increase 213,000 was from migration. The largest increases were from Poland (+60k); Lithuania (+22k) and +40k from the rest of the EU-25 excluding Britain and Northern Ireland. According  to the 2006 Census (Table 29A) 129,000 people whose birthplace was in Eastern Europe were living in the Irish Republic. These numbers are dramatically higher than they were in the 2002 Irish Census, when there were only approximately 2,000 Poles and Lithuanians living in Ireland. Interestingly, the chart shows that fear of unemployment in Ireland rose, as it did in the UK as the number of East Europeans in the country increased since 2002, even though there has been no change in unemployment in Ireland. ILO unemployment  has remained steady in Ireland at 4.4% since 2002. Consistent with a rise in the fear  of unemployment, average earnings growth has fallen since 2003 from 6.4% to 3.1%. ###newline###  Turning first to the impact of recent immigration on labour market outcomes, there is tentative evidence to suggest that A8 workers have lowered wage inflation among the least skilled. Chart 7 shows a negative relationship between the change in the annual rate of wage inflation of those in elementary occupations between 2005 and 2006 and the change in the share of A8 workers one year earlier, as recorded in the WRS in 2004 and 2005, across regions. The downward sloping line is consistent with a reduction in wage pressures brought about by immigration, or an increase in the fear of unemployment, or both. Has the recent rise in immigration caused UK unemployment to increase? We know that most immigrants are young (43% of workers on the WRS are aged 18-24), and that the most recent rise in the aggregate unemployment rate has been disproportionately driven by an increase in youth unemployment. In fact, the proportion of total unemployment accounted for by 18-24 year olds has been rising steadily, from 24.3% of the total in 2000, to 30.7% in 2006Q3 and 31.6% March-May 2007. So what about the possibility that the influx of migrants has increased the  youth unemployment rate? There is only a weakly positive, but statistically insignificant, relationship between those regions that have witnessed the largest increases in youth unemployment and those that have seen the biggest influxes of new immigrants. The impact of immigration on inflation and growth is not clear-cut. The theory is relatively simple: as outlined above, immigration causes a supply shock to the labour market, in other words an unanticipated increase in the supply of workers. As such, there are more workers willing to work at the prevailing market wage, so firms are less inclined to accept higher wage demands.  It follows that weaker real wage  growth leaves households with less disposable income to purchase goods and services, and will therefore tend to slow the rate at which prices of those products (inflation) increase. And it doesn t have to be workers moving from one country to another to induce this type of effect, it s enough for UK firms to be able to threaten a relocation of their business to a lower labour cost economy, such as one of the A8. There is clear evidence that these effects are taking place. However, the effects of immigration are not only on the supply side. On the demand side, immigrants are extra consumers and thus they raise aggregate consumption demand. However, it is likely that immigrants spend a lower fraction of their income when compared to domestic workers, perhaps because they send remittances back home or spend less on durable goods while temporarily resident in the UK   this would, on its own, suggest that immigrants raise demand by less than they raise supply. However, the funds that migrants send home might be recycled back to the UK through greater export demand, and UK consumers might also benefit from lower prices as a result of the extra productivity of migrants. Aggregate demand might also rise because of increased investment. On balance I would suggest that at present it appears that the recent inflow of workers from the A10 is likely to have raised potential supply by more than it has raised demand, and thereby has acted to reduce inflationary pressures. This argument holds for three reasons. First, the consumption behaviour of native workers may have been affected by the increased  fear  of unemployment resulting from a more flexible labour market. Second, the recycling of remitted funds back to the UK is unlikely to be perfect. Third, firms may be able to substitute between capital and labour, offsetting some of the potential for investment spending to rise. This brings me neatly back to my starting point, and hopefully clarifies the reason I am such an advocate of the work of the Esm e Fairbairn Foundation. We have seen that the UK labour market faced a supply shock from the recent rise in immigration from the A8 countries. This could have had an adverse impact on the UK economy, causing increased unemployment among natives. However, supply-side initiatives to help people help themselves, such as those promoted by the Foundation through their programme supporting Enterprise and Independence, help the labour market respond appropriately to shocks such as these. Such initiatives mean that workers are better able to match to available jobs and the workforce is more flexible than it would otherwise be, and hence result in an improvement in the (non-inflationary) growth potential of the UK economy.