 n 2009, demand in the world s major economies fell, relative to its pre-crisis trend, by around  USD 2.5 trillion or 5 per cent of GDP. The financial crisis left almost no country unscathed. While unprecedented policy measures allowed the world to escape a second Great Depression, the global recovery This article looks at the role global imbalances played in fuelling the financial crisis, and the importance of achieving a rebalancing of global demand in order to foster a sustainable recovery. Its key message is that, in today s highly interconnected global economy, a ensure both (i) the level of world demand is sufficient for the world recovery to continue and (ii) that future ###newline###  Since the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s, international monetary arrangements have evolved into a decentralised system. Countries are free to make independent choices about their monetary, exchange rate and financial stability policies. Greater capital mobility has also been one of the defining features of the current regime. In the run-up to the recent crisis, net capital flows more than doubled in less than a decade (Chart 1) and global imbalances widened to near unprecedented levels (Chart 2). These growing flow imbalances have been accompanied by growing stock imbalances. The US net external liability  position  quadrupled  in  size in the course of a decade, rising to USD 3.5 trillion in 2008 (25 per cent of GDP). And the net external asset positions of Japan and Germany rose by around USD 1.7 trillion and USD 0.8 trillion respectively (around 35 per cent and 25 per cent of 2008 GDP) over the same period, while Chinese net external assets reached USD 1.5 trillion, a third of GDP, in 2008. What drove these net capital flows  uphill ? Chart 1 illustrates that these flows were associated with a decline in long-term interest rates, pointing to either a fall in desired investment or an increase in desired saving at the global level. Were such changes to occur in any given country, they would tend to increase that country s current account balance, leading either to a smaller deficit or a larger surplus. But the fact that global current account imbalances were growing over this period indicates that these shifts in saving-investment balances occurred in countries that were already running surpluses. Chart 3 demonstrates that rising saving-investment imbalances in surplus countries were driven primarily by increased saving, rather than decreased 
investment. Although investment had been high and rising in surplus countries, saving had been even higher, and increasing at a faster rate. A  savings glut  in surplus countries created ever-larger net capital outflows that allowed the United States   and other deficit countries   to finance continued borrowing. In an accounting sense, the increase in emerging market saving as a share of world GDP reflected two factors. Taking China as an illustration, Chart 4 shows that in China, national savings increased as percentage of national disposable income from 2001 onwards. Chart 5 shows that Chinese GDP has doubled Surplus regions are those with current account surpluses greater than 1% of GDP in 2008 and include Commonwealth of Independent States and Mongolia, Developing Asia, Japan, Middle East and Newly Industrialised Asia; deficit regions are those with current account deficits greater than 1% of GDP and include Central and Eastern Europe, Sub-Sahara Africa, United Kingdom and United States. as a share of world GDP since 2001   accentuating the increase in Chinese savings as a share of world GDP. There are three possible, inter-connected, reasons why domestic saving in emerging economies increased. First, many of these economies adopted a strategy of expanding manufactured exports to create employment. This required maintaining highly competitive exchange rates and resulted in a substantial accumulation of foreign exchange reserves. Second, in the aftermath of the Asian crisis governments decided to accumulate reserves for precautionary reasons. And third, low levels of financial development may have played an important role through a variety of channels including Meanwhile, policymakers in advanced economies followed a strategy of aiming to maintain an adequate level of overall demand consistent with steady, low inflation. In some cases, that implied that they ran substantial current account deficits. At the time, all the economies seemed to gain: just as the high-saving countries created employment, the low-saving economies enjoyed faster real consumption growth as the price of imported manufactured goods fell. Within their own terms, all these actions were rational. All the main players   countries, regulators, central banks, and commercial banks   were rationally pursuing their own self interest. But what made sense for each player individually did not make sense in aggregate. These actions had collective consequences. Obstfeld and Taylor s capital mobility index is judgemental and takes values between 0 and 1. The pattern of growth, with the associated imbalances and mis-pricing of risk, was not sustainable: as we know only too well, the ensuing financial crisis threatened the entire stability of the financial system. Indeed, as Chart 6 illustrates, financial crises have been a hallmark of the current incarnation of the international monetary and financial system (IMFS), with the reappearance of global financial instability coinciding with the rapid increase in capital mobility. Chart 7 shows that the change in countries  non-performing loan (NPL) ratios between 2007 and 2009 and their current account balance in 2007 are correlated, though of course the direction of causation could go both ways. By comparison, the relationship between the change in countries  NPL ratios and their banks  capital ratios is insignificant. Table 1 also Sum of absolute values of surpluses and deficits. Based on available data for a sample of G20 and EU countries. Based on a sample of 56 countries, using data based on methodology developed by Bordo et al. (2001). Based on a sample of 56 countries, using data based on methodology developed by Bordo et al. (2001) and supplemented by Reinhart (2010), Mecagni et al. (2009) and Hutchison and Noy (2006). Indeed, the main lesson from the crisis is the need to find better ways of ensuring the right collective outcome. Reforms to financial regulation and the structure of the banking system need to take place in order to prevent another financial crisis. Many of these reforms are already underway. Improved financial regulation will help to intermediate the flows associated with global imbalances. But we cannot expect too much of regulation: it may well be circumvented or diluted over time, and there will be leakages, both across borders and through the shadow banking system. So the global economy will remain vulnerable to the risks associated with imbalances 
if they are not tackled at source. That will require some way of ensuring that countries  policies result in a sustainable outcome. ###newline###  All countries accept that global rebalancing is necessary. But there is a clear difference between the ex ante path of adjustment desired by the surplus countries, which are faced with the need for a structural shift away from reliance on exports, and the ex ante path of adjustment preferred by the deficit countries, which are under greater pressure to reduce the burden of debt in both private and public sectors. Talk of currency conflicts is a symptom of a deeper disagreement on the appropriate time path of real adjustment. The reason this matters is that, since surpluses and deficits must add to zero for the world as a whole, differences between these desired ex ante adjustment paths are reconciled ex post by changes in the level of world output. And the risk is that unless agreement on a common path of adjustment is reached, conflicting policies will result in that ex post path taking place at an undesirably low level of world output. Today s IMFS has become distorted. The major surplus and deficit countries are pursuing economic strategies that are in direct conflict. And there are some innocent victims. Those emerging market economies which have adopted floating currencies are now suffering from the attempts of other countries to hold down their exchange rates, and are experiencing uncomfortable rates of capital inflows and currency appreciation. So there is more to this issue than a bilateral conflict between China and the United States. Current exchange rate tensions illustrate the resistance to the relative price changes that are necessary for a successful rebalancing. The need to act in the collective interest has yet to be recognised, and, unless it is, it will be only a matter of time before one or more countries resort to protectionism as the only domestic instrument to support a necessary rebalancing. That could, as it did in the 1930s, lead to a disastrous collapse in activity around the world. Every country would suffer ruinous consequences. But, to borrow a phrase, in order to be tough on protectionism, we need also to be tough on the causes of protectionism. So what needs to be done? I would suggest  two principles for the way ahead. First, focus discussion on the underlying disagreement about the right speed of adjustment to the real pattern of spending. This discussion should be informed by countries  ability to follow that path in a 
sustainable way. Without agreement on this, policies will inevitably conflict. Once broad agreement is reached, it should then be easier to agree on the instruments of policy. Second, in terms of policy instruments, put on the table many potential policy measures   not just the single issue of exchange rates. That should include, in addition to exchange rates, rules of the game for controlling capital inflows, more efficient means for countries to self insure, plans to raise saving in the deficit countries, structural reforms to boost demand in the surplus countries and even the role and governance of the international financial institutions. What is needed now is a  grand bargain  among the major players in the world economy. A bargain that recognises the benefits of compromise on the real path of economic adjustment in order to avoid the damaging consequences of a move towards protectionism. Exchange rates will have to be part of such a bargain, but they logically follow a higher level agreement on rebalancing and sustaining a high level of world demand. A natural forum in which to strike a bargain is the G20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth. So far,  the process has failed to achieve   a move to a better outcome. If we cannot achieve cooperation voluntarily then a more rules-based automatic system may  need  to  be  considered to restore global demand and to maintain future global economic and financial stability. ###newline###   Sudden stops and the Mexican wave: Currency crises, capital flow reversals and output loss in emerging markets , Journal of Development Economics, 79, pp. 225-248 ###newline###   This time is different chartbook: country histories on debt, default, and financial crises , NBER Working Paper, No. 15815