 It is a great pleasure to be here today, especially at a time when there is an active policy debate in many developing countries about whether one should adopt institutional measures that attempt to entrench lower inflation. Of course, the National Council of Applied Economic Research is playing an active role in that debate in an Indian context. In some OECD countries, the significant decline in inflation in recent years (Figure ) appears to have been associated with some commentators either proclaiming the   Death of Inflation  or heralding the onset of a pernicious deflation. Central bankers who raise interest rates in order to hit inflation targets are, by these commentators, commonly described as fighting the last war.For example, Shilling () argues that  ..it is right to speak not merely of the end, nor of the conquest, but rather of the death of inflation.  (p-) Such views appear to be predicated on a host of structural changes which have intensified product market competition and improved labour market performance in OECD countries, and do appear to be placing downward pressure on prices and wages; and these authors are right to remind us of the importance of some of these factors. In the UK, the Government has asked the Monetary Policy Committee to attempt to achieve a  % inflation target, with an   open letter  to the Chancellor being required if inflation falls outside the  %- % band. In today  s lecture, I plan to discuss the important role accorded to these aforementioned structural  disinflationary  forces  in my thinking.However, perhaps unsurprisingly, I will conclude that one cannot be complacent about inflation, and that central bankers still have a job to do! ###newline###  As my colleague, William Buiter () has recently emphasised again, inflation is, ultimately, a monetary phenomenon.An improvement, say, in the workings of the labour market is something that, in the long-run, would be associated with a lowering of the so -called non- accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU, hereafter), but need have no direct impact on the inflation rate. Specifically, suppose that we start in a position where inflation is running at  % and would, on unchanged interest rates, remain constant thereafter. Now, assume that the NAIRU falls for some exogenous reason e.g. a change in government policy vis- -vis the administration of unemployment benefits. Then, other things being equal, inflation out -turns will start coming in below target. A central bank that, like the Bank of England (BoE hereafter), has a symmetric inflation target will respond to the expected below target inflation by lowering interest rates. However, over time, the actual unemployment rate should drift down to the new, lower level of the NAIRU. When that happens, one would expect interest rates to rise back to their original level. Hence, in the short-run, the benign structural factors should enable inflation to come in lower than before. However, a central bank like the BoE shall attempt to raise the inflation rate back to its original target level by lowering interest rates. Therefore, inflation does not necessarily die as central bankers with symmetric inflation targets actively resist deflation. I should say that the  short-run  in this example could, in practice, last several years, as structural factors that lower the NAIRU can, sometimes, improve gradually over a number of years. The above example discussed the case of an improvement in labour market performance. In many respects, the effects of an intensification of product market competition are similar. In most models of union-based wage bargaining or efficiency wages, a change in product market conditions directly affects the wage outcome, and the NAIRU. Therefore, one could analyse it in a similar way to the improvement in labour market performance. In discussing the impact of these supply-side improvements, I have deliberately abstracted from the demand-side impact of some of these supply-side changes, which, in general, might also affect the short-run level of interest rates. Specifically, a fall in the NAIRU may well be associated with a fall in the equity risk premium, and, hence, aggregate demand may rise in line with standard wealth effects. On the other hand, the restructuring activity that is typically associated with an intensification of product market competition usually leads to an increased sense of job insecurity, which hurts consumption. While these demand-side considerations affect the precise path of interest rates, they are unlikely to affect the qualitative aspects of our basic thesis. ###newline###  A variety of the structural changes that are supposed to have killed inflation are factors that have contributed to intensified product market competition. One would expect an increase in product market competition to lead to lower wages, as the relevant firms will tend to partially offset the effect on their profit margins   e.g. after the trucking regulatory reforms of the late s in the US, Rose () found that, between  and , there was a decline of approximately  per cent in the size of the union wage differential in trucking.  One reason that there has probably been an increase in product market competition is globalisation, i.e. the increasing integration of global product markets.Figure  suggests a striking increase in the degree of import penetration in the UK, which is representative of a more general trend in OECD countries. My colleague, DeAnne Julius (), has recently reminded  us that foreign direct investment (FDI) has also played an important role in this context, with the UK now one of the most important outward investors worldwide (Figure ). In a UK context, anecdotal evidence suggest that, in many industries, a combination of low cost imports and the threat of relocating a plant abroad has had a substantial effect in terms of keeping a lid on wages, and preliminary econometric work (see Clark and Wadhwani ()) is also supportive of this notion. Evidence of increased product market competition has not just been confined to globalisation. Government action has also played a role here.Privatisation and/or regulatory changes in a whole host of industries including gas, water, telecom, electricity, airports, rail, the docks and broadcasting have led to rather more competitive product market conditions. Note in particular, the evidence that an important factor (affecting % of cases) is a change in consumer behaviour in terms of being more conscious about the   value for money  .  Now, a low inflation environment is one where consumers are less likely to confuse absolute and relative price changes, and, it does, therefore, make them more discerning buyers. Also, interestingly a more cost-conscious environment at work (because of intensified product market competition) probably makes individuals more price-conscious in their personal shopping habits as well. Another bit of evidence for an intensification of product market competition is in Figure    which is suggestive of a change in the relationship between domestic capacity utilisation and the balance of firms who expect to increase prices, in that, in the late s, the perceived ability to increase prices seems lower, at any given level of utilisation, than in the s or s (though the s looks similar). Over the next few years, though, a potentially important reason for intensified product market competition and/or efficiency gains is the development of the internet. As my colleague, DeAnne Julius () has pointed out, it took  years to achieve  million users for radio,  years for TV,  for PCs, but, for the internet, it has taken fewer than ! (Figure ). ###newline###  standard theory predicts that high search costs allow prices to be above marginal costs in equilibrium (see, e.g. Salop ()) so one would expect the lowering of search costs associated with the internet to lower prices. Lower market entry costs must limit the price premiums sustainable by existing market participants by increasing actual or potential competition. Hence, it is hardly surprising that Brynjolfsson and Smith () found that the prices for books and CDs sold through the internet were %-% lower than in conventional outlets, even after accounting for costs from shipping and handling, delivery, and local sales taxes. ###newline###  While it is true that there have been structural changes in the labour markets of most OECD countries   I shall illustrate my thesis with regard to the UK, since I know it somewhat better. In attempting to explain why the NAIRU might have fallen since , I initially draw on the standard reference works on attempting to explain UK unemployment, that are represented by Layard, Nickell and Jackman (), Minford () and Nickell (). Table  shows that union membership was as high as % in  and had fallen to % by .Strike activity was much higher in , , working days lost to strikes, as compared to just , in . This may, in part, be attributable to the changes in industrial relations legislation since  (see, e.g. Brown and Wadhwani ()). The real oil price in  was around five times as high as . Similarly, an index of regional mismatch in  was around six times as high as . Further, the replacement ratio (i.e. the ratio of out-of- work benefit to estimated in-work income) in  was higher than in . Also, the benefits system was progressively tightened from  with the Restart programme, under which unemployed people on benefit were interviewed every six months in order to ensure that they were looking for work, and to provide them with a menu of help. ###newline###  In the US, economists have increasingly questioned the stability of the standard Phillips curve in which price inflation depends on the unemployment rate, past price inflation and standard measures  of  price supply shocks.For example, a recent paper by researchers at the Federal Reserve Board (see Brayton, Roberts and Williams ()) argues Using different specifications, Stock () and Katz and Krueger () have also concluded that the relationship between inflation and unemployment in the US has changed during the s. ###newline###  Regression of -quarter change in earnings growth on five lags of the dependent variable, - quarter change in RPI inflation, log of the unemployment rate lagged four periods and seasonal dummies. ###newline###  % on the claimant count)   Figure . First, union density is now rather lower (Figure ), and working days lost in stoppages have almost vanished (Figure ). Second, the ratio of out of work benefits to in work income is lower than in the sixties (Figure ), and the real level of the oil price is also not much different (Figure ). ###newline###  In addition, as we noted above, import penetration has steadily increased over the period (cf Figure ), and, deregulation and privatisation have probably helped intensify the extent of product market competition. However, there are several factors that have moved in the direction of increasing the NAIRU. Perhaps the most striking and direct evidence of the post-s deterioration in the UK labour market is the fact that at any given level of vacancies, we have much more unemployment than we did before, i.e. the so-called Beveridge curve has moved out (Figure ). This must have occurred either due to a reduction in the search effectiveness of the unemployed, or because of an increase in mismatch. Note that the reduction in search effectiveness might arise from either firms or workers becoming more choosy. In his persuasive review of this question, Nickell () points to several  relevant considerations. First, perhaps encouraged by the indefinite availability of benefits for much of  the period,  the proportion of long-term unemployed has been high.Although it has fallen in recent years, it still remains above the average level of the sixties (cf Figure ). Second, he points out that, in some respects, the benefit system is less job-friendly than in the sixties (notwithstanding the decline in the replacement ratio). In particular, housing benefit (which pays the rent) represents a significant fraction of total benefits for single persons who are unemployed, with a high  implicit  marginal  tax rate  of %.Third, the demand for unskilled workers has probably fallen (perhaps because of technical change and competition from the Newly Industrialised Countries) by more than its supply.On one index of skill mismatch, there is evidence that, on average, it is higher than it was in the sixties (Figure ). Fourth, the average level of UK unemployment in the s and s was unusually low by long-term historical standards and it is possible that the s were an anomalous period. In addition to Stephen Nickell  s aforementioned arguments, there are at least two more considerations that are worthy of our attention. First, Andrew Oswald () shows that over the last  years, countries with the fastest growth in home-ownership have also had the fastest growth in unemployment.In addition,   countries   with   high  levels  ofhome  ownershipalso   appear   tohave higher unemployment. Oswald presents evidence suggesting that: Unemployed home-owners are much less willing to move areas to find work than private renters. The latter have a notably fast outflow rate from unemployment in to jobs. UK regions with larger proportions of private renters have higher outflows from unemployment and larger numbers of movers per head. Clearly, at this point, we only have a few intriguing correlations, and much more research is needed.However, if Oswald  s preliminarily research is validated, then one could no longer regardtheriseinowner-occupation(Figure)asanunmixedblessing,because, notwithstanding other social benefits, it would be a factor that keeps the NAIRU higher than it need be. Another factor that might have contributed to a rise in the NAIRU since the sixties is the rather higher level of the tax wedge (Figure ). Economists are fond of the notion that, in the long-  run, a rise in the tax wedge has no consequences for the level of unemployment, with the labour market behaving as if labour supply is inelastic, and taxes are all shifted onto labour. However, Nickell and Layard () record that the empirical evidence on this issue is mixed, so the rise in the overall tax burden must remain a candidate explanation for why the NAIRU now might be higher than in the sixties. ###newline###  Clearly, there is uncertainty about where the NAIRU is in relation to current unemployment. Our discussion above makes one relatively confident that the NAIRU today is below what it was in the s, though it is likely to be above its level in the s. However, as we saw above (Figure ), the actual unemployment rate is already at a -year low, so the question that we have to ask ourselves is whether the benefits of the NAIRU-reducing structural changes in the labour and product markets have already been seen. Figure  reminds us that, on a variety of measures, real earnings growth in  has been higher than in recent years. However, one benign explanation of the rise in real wages is that it has arisen because of our inflation coming in rather lower than had been expected (cf Figure ). Nevertheless, there is clear evidence of growing skill shortages and recruitment difficulties (Figure ). Notwithstanding the evidence on   price wars  in retailing that we alluded to above, perhaps because of growing wage pressure, some forward-looking survey indicators of prices have turned up in the services sector (Table ). Hence, it is perhaps, not surprising that, in recent months, the MPC has felt it appropriate to raise interest rates by  b.p. on two occasions, in the spirit of early, pre-emptive action; suggesting that the committee, at least, does not believe that inflation is dead. Note that when preparing our inflation forecast for the Inflation Report (November ), the committee explicitly allowed for a reduction in structural price-cost margins to reflect a likely intensification of product market competition (arising from, e.g. the internet), but this did not preclude inflation rising to the target level at the end of two years. ###newline###  I have argued today that significant structural changes in labour and product markets in OECD countries have reduced the NAIRU, but that it would be wrong to conclude that these structural changes  have  led to  the   death of inflation  .Inflation is, ultimately, a monetary phenomenon, and keeping inflation low depends on whether there is the political will to take the sometimes difficult decisions necessary to achieve that end. Hence, designing institutions that entrench low inflation remains an important part of the policy agenda. Of course, we do not desire low inflation for its own sake, but because it might help boost growth   a recent cross-country study concluded (see Romer and Romer ())    on average, the poor are much better off in countries where monetary policy has kept inflation low and aggregate demand stable. .