It seems only a very short time ago that I last had the pleasure of visiting Northern Ireland - in fact it was in May . Time flies when the world about us is changing fast as it certainly has been in so many respects in the intervening period. ###newline### Let me start with the world economy. We were already then in the grip of the financial shock that had started in emerging markets in Asia in . But that shock intensified through  - spreading to Russia and parts of Latin America and elsewhere - and at one point, following the collapse of the US hedge fund LTCM, threatening to engulf the financial system of the industrial world. ###newline### The economic consequence of this financial turmoil was a sharp slowdown in the world economy to around half its longer-term trend rate of growth. It could have been far worse. The slowdown could have turned into an actual downturn had the industrial countries - led by the United States, and the United Kingdom and closely followed by the Eurozone and Japan - not succeeded in stimulating their own, domestic, demand. In the event, the damage was contained, and world economic activity is now recovering far more quickly than anyone could have expected. But, encouraging though it is, the recovery is taking place in a context of large external imbalances within the world economy and large imbalances between strong domestic and weak external demand in a number of industrial countries - most notably in the US and here in the UK. The challenge now for the major industrial countries - as we discussed at the G meeting last weekend in Tokyo - is to secure a more balanced pattern of growth among our economies in order to help sustain the global expansion. ###newline### This chain of international events has also had a major impact on the pattern of exchange rates. Many emerging countries and some transition economies saw their exchange rates fall dramatically; but there were also important effects on the relationships between the currencies of the major industrial countries. The dollar and sterling have in fact remained reasonably stable against each other for most of the time since sterling withdrew from the ERM. The Yen, which had been notably weak on the Japanese recession has since picked up strongly as the prospect of recovery in Japan improved. But the most puzzling development in the exchange markets has been the disappointing weakening of the euro since its historic introduction at the beginning of last year. Initially this appeared to be related to the impact of the global slowdown on some of the larger Eurozone economies, which seemed likely to cause them to run further below capacity than had earlier been expected. But the more recent signs are that the Eurozone economy is now picking up relatively strongly, and it is harder to understand the euro's continuing weakness in the present context: it may just be a matter of time - for there is no doubt that the euro has considerable scope for appreciation. ###newline### Taken together, Mr President, these various international developments since I was last here in Belfast have greatly complicated the task of monetary management here in the UK - in fact it has been just about the most difficult external environment that I can recall. ###newline### At that time monetary policy was still aimed at moderating the pace of domestic demand growth to prevent the re-emergence of inflationary pressure - including wage pressures in the labour market. We actually raised rates by  % to  % shortly after my visit - but I promise you that was not a direct result of my visit here. ###newline### But if the performance of the economy as a whole has been relatively encouraging over this period, that is clearly not the case for every sector of the economy. And I am only too well aware that the internationally- exposed sectors - most of agriculture, much of manufacturing industry and some services sectors - wherever they are located within the UK, have suffered. In many instances, depending on the particular international profile of the business, they are continuing to suffer, as a result of the global economic developments that I have already described. The resulting agony continues in many cases notwithstanding the present pick-up in world demand, and is particularly acute for those businesses and sectors most exposed to the continuing weakness of the euro. They no doubt include some of your own businesses. ###newline### I realise that to say that I sympathise with those of you in this situation - and I really do sympathise with you - is scant consolation. But I want to assure you that we do not ignore the exchange rate in either our inflation forecasts or in our monetary policy judgements. The strong exchange rate in itself has both a direct dampening effect on our domestic price level and an indirect effect through lowering net external demand - and both of these effects we take into account as best we can. Absent those effects of the strong exchange rate - other things equal - policy would have needed to be correspondingly tighter. But while we do - and will continue to - try to make full allowance for the strength of the exchange rate there are limits to just how far we can sensibly go. The really hard question for us is could we - or should we - attempt to protect those businesses most affected by the strong exchange rate even if that meant putting the economy as a whole at significant risk of rising inflation. The reality is that, were we to do so - notwithstanding our specific mandate from the Government - we would not succeed in protecting even the suffering sectors except possibly in the ###newline### very short term; and in the medium to long-term our overall economic performance - in terms of growth and employment would - on all past experience - almost certainly be worse. ###newline### As it is, Mr President, the recovery in the world economy, and the extraordinary efforts of UK businesses themselves to cope with the hostile international environment, are already resulting in a stronger net external trade performance. That in turn is contributing to the recovery in our own economy, particularly in manufacturing output growth and to the more encouraging news in recent surveys. To the extent that this improvement in external demand persists, it will help to ease the exceptional pressures on the most internationally-exposed sectors, and contribute to a better balance within the UK economy. But it needs, of course, to be accompanied by corresponding moderation of the growth of domestic demand - after the offsetting stimulus of a year ago - if we are to maintain overall stability. That essentially is why interest rates have had to rise since last Autumn. ###newline### The broad prospect now for the UK economy as a whole over the next couple of years, which is the extent of our forecasting horizon, is one of continuing relatively strong growth, with continuing relatively high employment and continuing relatively low inflation. The monetary policy debate is a narrow one: it is about just how strong the growth, just how high the employment and just how low the rate of inflation. It is as good a prospect for the economy as a whole as we have known for some time. ###newline### We all have a part to play in this. The Bank of England's primary role is to help to maintain the stable macro- economic environment - in the interests of the UK economy as a whole but in the interests also of Northern Ireland. The specific purpose of my present visit is in fact to open, officially, our Northern Ireland Agency, which is a direct result of my earlier visit. This completes our network of  regional agencies across the UK - with the purpose of keeping ourselves more closely informed of regional economic developments. Previously Neil Kemsley covered Northern Ireland from our Agency in Liverpool and is here to make his farewell - and I am grateful to him for all that he did in reporting on developments here. But Nigel Falls - one of our most experienced regional Agents - is now established here in Belfast itself. He is also with us today. I very much hope that many of you will establish regular contact with him so that he can inform our Monetary Policy Committee each month of the particular problems that exist in Northern Ireland, so that we can take them into account in our monetary policy process. His reports will complement those which Roy Bailie, our Non- Executive Director here in Ireland, gives regularly to our Court of Directors. ###newline### Mr President, as I said at the outset, a great deal has happened in a very short time since I was last here - in the world economy, in the UK economy, and here in Northern Ireland, both economically and politically. It has been in many respects a particularly testing time, but we have I believe come through it all quite successfully and are now well placed to continue moving ahead. It will require sustained commitment from all of us - but the people of Northern Ireland have never been lacking in commitment!