 It is a great pleasure to address this distinguished conference on policy rules. My task, as I understand it, is to set the scene from the standpoint of someone engaged in the monetary policy process with an emphasis on the two-way interaction between policy and academic enquiry. Certainly, as compared with the situation a decade or so ago, there is a recognisable consensus, with developments in policy, in macroeconomic theory, and in empirical analysis pulling, so to speak, in the same direction. ###newline###  A rough characterisation of the developing consensus on macroeconomic policy design would include the following: There is no long-run trade-off between nominal developments (inflation) and the real economy (homogeneity, degree zero, of the nominal price and wage system). It is essential to establish a credible, non-accommodating policy to control the price level and inflation. The central bank s responsibilities in controlling inflation in the medium term should be carried out at minimum cost in terms of deviations of output from potential and deviations of inflation from target. Clearly, different parts of the consensus have different status. Thus, whilst  and  may be regarded as fundamental, ,  and  are instrumental and more contentious  alternative choices and arrangements could be made and have existed in the past. The important qualification, , requires welfare judgements or at least some scheme for weighting together different costs. Recent legislation, defining mandates for central banks, reflects these complex objectives. Thus, the European Central Bank (ECB) is charged with maintaining price stability and without prejudice to that, to support the policies of the European Commission as laid out in Article II of the Treaty which include growth and employment. The Bank of England Act, similarly, adopts a hierarchical or lexicographic ordering, charging the Monetary Policy Committee with maintaining price stability and, subject to that, with supporting the policies of the government for employment and growth. In the United States, there are multiple objectives, but given the widespread agreement on  and  above, there has, in recent years, been a hierarchical ordering there too. In the economics literature, the monetary authority s behaviour is typically described in terms of the abstract concept of its reaction function, which delineates how the instruments of policy are adjusted in response to (a) its targets, and (b) its assessment of the current and future state of the economy. Assuming that the instrument of policy is the short-term nominal interest rate, the interest-rate reaction function can thus be seen as an algorithmic rule or feedback system describing how the monetary authority attempts to home in on its objectives. Simple versions of such reaction functions abound, including the Taylor rule (where the interest rate is taken as responding to current deviations of inflation from target and output from potential) and that implicit in inflation forecast targeting regimes, where interest rates react to deviations of forecast inflation from target.In practice, the reaction function is embedded in an institution usually the central bank together with associated constitutional and other arrangements and may involve a complex set of procedures and judgements. It is unlikely to be expressible as a single simple rule at the least it would involve a set of anticipated contingent responses. The reaction function approach brings out several intertwined aspects of the current practice of monetary policy. The first might be termed the nominal anchor function: the assignment of medium-term responsibility for the control of the price level or inflation to the monetary authority. This function, in turn, has two dimensions. The first is the target itself which may be explicitly quantified (as in the UK) or implicitly defined, e.g. as price stability. The practical question of how the target should be made operational and measured is not as straightforward as sometimes appears. The second dimension is the instrument of policy and the feedback system, which together must be sufficiently powerful to achieve the medium-term objective for prices and inflation. The second general aspect of current practice is the stabilisation function, capturing the idea that the medium-term objective should ideally be achieved at minimum cost (e.g. in terms of deviations of inflation from target and output from potential). The optimum reaction function clearly depends on the characteristics of the economy, on the shocks anticipated, and on the welfare judgements made. Since the optimum reaction function is likely to be highly sensitive to alternative models and specifications and shocks, there is interest in simple rules which produce reasonably good results and which appear robust. The practical policy analogue is the search for a set of procedures which delivers a sensible reaction function with desirable properties in a wide range of possible circumstances. The monetary policy reaction function is thus an extremely important part of the way in which the economic system as a whole functions; and for the system to function well, it must have, and be perceived to have, appropriate properties. With forward-looking behaviour, it is the credibility of policy as embodied in the reaction function that stabilises expectations of inflation. But there is more to it than that. Combined with a standard  natural-rate  or  accelerationist  view of inflationary pressure, an  appropriate  reaction function should lead to the anticipation of longer-term economic growth at So far I have been speaking rather generally about a certain type of monetary policy regime which combines longer-term control of inflation with activist stabilisation in the short term. Within such a framework, one can imagine many different institutional arrangements many different reaction functions, some no doubt, better than others. Like other matters of definition, it is hard to define exactly what is meant by an appropriate regime, but we mostly recognise it when we see it. (Just as we recognise cats and distinguish them from dogs, though most of us without a degree in biology would be hard pressed to define the difference.) Again from a political-economy point of view, what really matters is that an appropriate policy framework should be instituted with the right general properties. That then leads on to a second set of questions about improving or even optimising performance. To use another analogy, a boat without a helmsman is an indeterminate system.  With a helmsman in place, there is a good chance that the boat will move across the bay in the direction desired by the operator. The big question is whether there is a helmsman in the boat or not. But, of course, the boat would function much better and more predictably with a skilled steersman than a novice. The debate about policy rules has now moved, it may be argued, beyond the question about how to pin down the rate of inflation and provide a nominal anchor to centre on how to become better at steering the economy. UK post-war history is littered with attempts to design a macroeconomic framework to provide a nominal anchor against inflation combined with a reasonable amount of stabilisation. Most ended in failure, usually with serious conflict between internal and external objectives. Inflation targeting was introduced in  after Sterling was ejected from the ERM. The present regime, with monetary policy delegated to the Monetary Policy Committee at the Bank of England, was instituted in May . I am not going to give a long account of the UK system, the broad characteristics of which are well known.But I do want to pick out a few points which seem important from the point of view of system design. The general commitment to price stability (and, subject to that, to supporting the government s policies for growth and employment) is defined in the Bank of England Act , where it is also laid down that it is the Chancellor of the Exchequer s responsibility to set the target. A well-known feature is that the target is set as a single number (not a range), and that it is set in a forward-looking but effectively time-independent manner. The target could change, but in practice has been maintained at .% for the annual rate of change of the series RPIX since inception in . An oft-cited reason for retaining governmental responsibility for setting and defining the target is that it is the government that is democratically accountable to the public. It also means that the delegation of responsibility for meeting the target to the MPC is particularly clear-cut. With a point target which defines an aspiration in a timeless way, it is obvious to all that it will not be exactly met, so that ideas of shocks, uncertainty, and constrained discretion are, arguably, built-in from the start. The symmetry of the objective, whereby shortfalls in inflation are treated as of equal importance to overshoots, is appropriate to a reaction- function type of feedback system and, as already noted, has proved extremely important in gaining public acceptance of the inflation target regime. Thus the Bank of England is instrument-independent not goal-independent. It has long been recognised in the UK that the principal instrument of monetary policy is the short- term interest rate,so the task of the MPC is, in principle, very straightforward: to use its control of the short-term interest rate to meet, as far as possible, the externally-given objective. But what is the reason for delegation? It is tempting to see the answer in terms of the academic literature on time-inconsistency and the inflation bias, in particular the argument made famous by Rogoff () that the bias would be reduced by delegation to a conservative central banker. I would not want to deny that this literature was, in general terms, influential, but it does not really ring true as the reason for the institutional change. If there were an inflation bias, it could still apply to the target-setters the government though the institutional change can be seen What this means is that the main point of delegation is not to employ conservative financiers, nor to set up a system of compensating incentives, but simply to hand over responsibility for the  reaction function  to a technically-competent authority charged with doing the job as well as possible. Credibility is important, but credibility here has little to do with the meaning derived from the inflation bias literature, and a great deal to do with clearly-specified objectives and with competence and trust that the job will be done as well as possible. This means that explanation of procedures, transparency and accountability are key aspects of the system. Arguably, the system in the UK is as transparent and accountable as any in the world. The nine members of the MPC (five  internal  and four  external ) are individually accountable under the Act for their votes: interest-rate decisions are by simple majority: the votes of each member are published within the Minutes, which appear after two weeks. Moreover, the MPC is severally responsible for the quarterly Inflation Reports, and the assessments and two-year-ahead forecasts for GDP growth and inflation published therein. (The forecasts are published as fan-charts, with probability ranges, to emphasise the inevitable uncertainty.) There are other checks and balances, such as appearances before Parliament s Treasury Select Committee and supervision of procedures by the Court of Directors of the Bank of England. As far as the operation of policy is concerned, the process can be described as an inflation forecast target regime a process which, along with the institution of the Inflation Report, was taken over from the system in place in  . The usual justifications for the focus on future inflation (e.g. Svensson, , ) are lags in the transmission mechanism, and the need to take account of a potentially large number of influences on the inflation process. Decisions are taken at relatively high frequency on a monthly timetable, with procedures in place for additional meetings if necessary.The forecasts are quarterly.  Pragmatically, it is sometimes useful to see the process as divided into two: the assessment of the current and future state of the economy on the one hand; and the response or reaction to that assessment on the other. Given the structure of the MPC, there are, in principle, nine different assessments, nine potentially different reaction functions, and a majority voting procedure that translates all that into an interest-rate decision. Despite the underlying complexity, the broad characteristics of the overall reaction function (using the term rather generally) are discernible and relatively predictable. A feature of the UK system with individual accountability and transparency is that it leads to publicly-expressed disagreements and dissent as well as, obviously, public knowledge of closely-split votes. Early worries that both of these would work against credibility and be destabilising now appear unfounded. If, as argued, the relevant meaning of  credibility  is a reputation for competence and trust in the system, then this should not be surprising. Given large uncertainty, it is presumably reassuring rather than otherwise that disagreements and differing assessments occur, are discussed and are resolved as far as policy is concerned by the decision-making procedures. The discernibility and predictability of monetary policy in the UK have, I would argue, been greatly enhanced during the operation of the new system. I want to stress two aspects. The first is the consequence of the successful offsetting response to the Asia crisis and the Russian Default (the latter occurred in late August ). Interest rates Indeed, success in stabilising medium-term anticipations of growth, unemployment and inflation could itself be the source of problems if, as recently, offsetting strategies contribute to imbalances between sectors and rising prices for assets such as houses. On the face of it, in terms of outcomes for inflation and growth, the UK system has worked well though it is usual to qualify such remarks with the observation that it is too soon to tell.  Chart . displays the record on annual RPIX inflation.  It suggests that there has been a remarkable improvement in inflation since inflation targets were adopted in  and a moderate undershoot in the last few years. If anything, the chart suggests that it was the adoption of an inflation-targeting regime that was important rather than the radically new arrangements introduced in . Chart ., taken from HM Treasury (), shows much more clearly the effect of the new arrangements. There was a marked effect on inflation expectations at the time of the announcement of the new regime, suggesting that institutional change had indeed had a substantial effect on the credibility of macroeconomic policy. Other evidence, not detailed here, confirms a slower but highly favourable effect on public expectations and anticipations. And, as noted above, the more qualitative impression is that the reaction function in the UK has come to be increasingly well understood and that the regime change commands a degree of public support. All this suggests that the UK system can be seen as a monetary regime of the right sort, embodying a reaction function (using the term generally) of the right type. To revert to an earlier analogy, the boat has a helmsman and the objectives are clear. This is a very big change. But a caveat is again necessary. Most previous attempts at redesigning UK macroeconomic policy were also put forward as solutions to the problem of combining inflation control with economic stability and failed. Why should the new system fare differently? The answer, I believe, is that the system is better-designed, since it incorporates not only some of the major lessons from history, but also the major insights that have come from theoretical and empirical research on monetary policy and monetary policy rules. None of this, of course, means that the system could not be improved or that difficulties have not arisen. Some difficulties concern the reaction function, such as how policy should react to exchange-rate movements, which have been large, or asset-price changes, which have also been large. Some relate to uncertainty, both regarding the data and about how the economy functions. Some relate to forecasting both as to how it should best be done, and the relationship between the forecast process and policy formation. I have some remarks about all these later in this address. I also want to say something about the interaction between monetary policy and other policies especially fiscal policy since it would be a great mistake to think of a well-functioning monetary system as, in some sense, closing the debate over macroeconomic policy and the policy mix. On the contrary, a well-functioning monetary policy is likely to throw the spotlight onto other aspects of overall policy design. ###newline###  The debate over rules versus discretion has been going on for a very long time but, for present purposes, a convenient starting point is Friedman s () advocacy of a fixed ( % per annum) growth for the money supply. Clearly, one aspect was the advocacy The Friedman paradigm was influential in the widespread adoption of monetary targets in the s. One reason was that the central bank practice of operating on nominal interest rates risked producing falls in real interest rates, a perverse and destabilising response, in the face of price shocks such as occurred in the early s. Switching to a fixed money supply rule would, it was claimed, lead to real interest rate rises a better (though not necessarily optimal) response. In fact, however, the practical adoption of monetary targets also involved using the short-term interest rate as the instrument of control. There is really no dispute nor was there in the early s that the central bank s control over money in developed financial systems is indirect, via the short-term interest rate. With the interest rate as instrument, the reaction-function approach gives a coherent account of how monetary targeting works in practice. The reaction function involves the monetary authorities using the interest rate to meet a target for the quantity of money (the term  money supply  is to be avoided). If the chosen aggregate really is related causally to the price level, this would provide an appropriate nominal anchor. But it is not necessary for there to be a causal link. Even if money is endogenously supplied (given the interest rate) by the private banking sector, the policy could work so long as the chosen aggregate were a good indicator of the state of the economy and so long as, in the longer term, the quantity of  money  was closely related to the final objective (the price level, for example) that is, so long as there were a reasonably stable money demand function. The system could even work if the monetary target were completely meaningless causally in determining prices (e.g., if the chosen target were notes and coins in the hands of the public, which are supplied on demand). The interest-rate reaction function would be doing the work, with the monetary aggregate performing the role of indicator. p. ). Other reaction functions, such as those based on targeting the exchange rate, also failed, sometimes spectacularly as with the ejection of the pound sterling from the European Monetary System in . Cecchetti (), amongst many others, is sceptical, even scathing, about monetary targets. He finds no use for them, preferring instead a policy of targeting inflation itself (though this does not, of course, rule out the possible statistical usefulness of various monetary aggregates as part of the overall process of assessing likely future developments in inflation). In fact the abandonment of monetary targeting did not lead, as Lawson had feared, to a wholesale return to government discretion and judgement, but progressively to the adoption of inflation target-type regimes based on interest-rate reaction functions and  constrained discretion  of the general type I have been discussing. This does not represent the abandonment of the objectives of monetary rules. On the contrary, the recognition of the need for a medium-term nominal anchor has, if anything, been strengthened. The automatic function of  money  as nominal anchor has had to give way to policy targets for inflation itself and the instrument of policy is seen as the short- term interest rate rather than the money supply.  Automatic responses to shocks have been replaced by a policy-determined feedback system. Finally, with the reintroduction of Keynesian stabilisation concerns, there is recognition that the reaction function needs to be designed to provide the medium-term nominal anchor at minimum cost in terms of output-gap and price fluctuations. Assuming that this is so as far as the operation of monetary policy is concerned, the split UK system, with the target set by the government, is interesting. In principle, as noted above, the time-inconsistency problem could continue to apply due to the government s control over the target itself, or, more generally, the government could renege and be seen to be likely to renege, by abandoning the system itself. I argued, above, that such behaviour was constrained, and can be seen to be constrained, by the reputational and political losses involved in opportunistically changing the target or weakening the system. This, however, is subject to the major caveat that such costs must actually be present. Arguably, they will be present and highly constraining, if the system itself is publicly understood and commands general support and not otherwise. The practical point here is that a constituency of general support for non-accommodating policies and inflation control is necessary for the system to work as intended. This is another aspect of transparency and accountability, which needs to be taken extremely seriously by central banks and governments alike. ###newline###  Thus, arguably, the system in the UK is well designed, both institutionally and in terms of some of the main lessons from the policy rules literature. It may not have been fully  tested in adversity though it has survived some pretty major shocks since inception. That said, there are a number of issues of continuing concern. The following is a selective account of some of them. reasonably optimistic that such departures can be identified in practice they suggest that the problem is probably no worse than the problem of identifying the natural rate or NAIRU. Clearly, the question of whether boom/bust cycles in asset prices should be headed off by monetary policy is highly topical focussing, obviously, on the behaviour of the stock market in the US and, to a lesser extent, on the house price boom in the UK. Moreover, there have been spectacular episodes in the past where boom/bust cycles have been associated with major instability and economic problems notably, as far as stock- market prices are concerned, the Great Crash in the US in the inter-war years and, more recently, the asset price bubble in Japan in the late s with its deflationary aftermath which is still continuing. (See, for example, Borio and Lowe, ). And as far as house prices are concerned, the UK boom of the late s and subsequent bust is still regarded as an exemplar of bad macroeconomic policy.There is no doubt that asset-price movements of the boom/bust type are perceived as a problem by policy-makers and, unfortunately, there is no particular reason to believe that the potential problems would simply go away just because a successful inflation-targeting regime had been established. There is an issue, however, as to whether the monetary authorities should alter their behaviour as a result. Suppose we think of the problem, in stripped-down terms, as involving the anticipation of a large positive shock followed by a large negative shock with the negative shock (roughly) balancing the positive shock so that the negative shock is larger, the larger the preceding positive shock. (Such a pattern would result, for example, from some stock/flow adjustment process.) The baseline position is that the consequences would be taken into account in the forward-looking procedures of the monetary authority and that the consequences for output and price instability would then be minimised in terms of some loss function. That is the end of the story as far as interest rates are concerned. Clearly, however, if there were some other policy instrument capable of lowering the magnitude of the first shock (and by construction therefore the second shock as well), it would be desirable that that policy should be used.The task of the monetary authorities would be eased and, of course, short of completely successful offsets by the monetary authorities, the instability of the economy would be reduced and welfare would be increased. The first-best response which may of course be unrealistic or costly for other reasons is that sources of instability should be tackled at source, removing or lowering the magnitude of the negatively correlated shocks themselves. As a practical example, consider the house price boom in the UK. If the rising house prices are regarded as a problem because they are likely to reverse and pose problems in the future, there are many who would argue that a first-best solution is that the factors behind such destabilising behaviour in the housing market should be tackled directly rather than by interest rates. From the inflation-targeting perspective, the interesting question is what should be done in the absence of alternative policies. As second-best, should interest-rate policy be diverted from its normal role, not to target an asset price, but to check some cumulative process early on in effect, to lower the magnitude of the correlated shocks under discussion? The argument for so doing would be that the variances of inflation and output would be thereby reduced which is perfectly consistent with standard interpretations of the loss function.But there is a trade-off involved (Bordo and Jeanne, ). The reduction in the shocks likely to hit the economy, if it can be achieved (it is quite a big if), takes the monetary authorities closer to their objective. But the diversion of the instrument from its normal role takes them further away (effectively imposing additional variability on the economy). The first needs to be bigger than the second for the policy to be desirable. One can see why much of the discussion in favour of central banks using interest rates in this way is conducted in terms of heading off bubble-type phenomena. The presumption is that the longer a bubble path goes on, the bigger the bust when it comes. There is an easy-to-make assumption that a timely upward move in interest rates, even though not justified in terms of the inflation target and the normal reaction function, would prick the bubble, lowering both the upward and downward aspects of the shock. Typically, it is further assumed that the upward movement of the interest rate is not too large and that it is short-lived (so the costs from this aspect of the policy are small) and the benefit in terms of shock reduction is large. Such arguments are usually helped by / hindsight. In practice, the difficulties in reliably identifying bubbles or other persistent departures In my view, the most persuasive argument against using interest rates to moderate destabilising processes (even if they can be identified) is one of credibility and transparency. It is hard enough to establish a credible reaction function based on clear objectives with the interest rate being used to meet the inflation target and, consistent with that, to offset shocks including shocks from the endogenous processes of the economy itself as far as possible. If the interest rate has another role as well, being used to moderate the shock structure (e.g. by heading off bubbles from time to time), the reaction function is far less rule-like and predictable, and the system is likely to be less transparent and accountable. There may be cases where interest rates should be used to reverse some cumulative process. But the potential costs to credibility and transparency weigh heavily against. This puts me (nearly) in the baseline camp familiar from the policy rules literature that the direct and indirect effects of asset prices on inflation should be taken into account, but that otherwise they should not normally be given special significance. I am sure, however, that the issue will continue to be the subject of research and I do not regard it as settled. I think, however, that there is a bit more to be said, and I come back to this topic in my closing remarks. non-movements in the actual exchange rate), but there is very little in the way of good explanation of the changes that have occurred, and the changes were not generally predicted ex ante. What is more, predictions of reversion have proved false so far. What does one do, given that one of the chief transmission mechanisms from monetary policy to the economy is (according, for example, to the Bank of England s macroeconomic forecasting model) through the exchange rate? In fact, forecasts and assessments are based on  technical assumptions . For a start, some of the noise in exchange-rate movements is removed by basing the starting point of forecasts on the average during a -day window. Second, forecasts are now made using a simple average of the path predicted by Uncovered Interest Parity (UIP) and a no- change assumption (the random walk hypothesis). The possibility of reversion  modelled as a probability each period of a step change downwards in the exchange rate  has, however, been a feature of the risks and skews presented in the fan-charts published in some recent Inflation Reports: per se this factor introduces an upward skew to the inflation forecast. All in all, this illustrates the practical point that interest-rate policy would be a great deal easier if we had better models of the exchange rate and a better handle on the elusive concept of its longer-term equilibrium value. The question of how interest-rate policy should react to the anticipation that there might be a downward  correction  of the exchange rate is not simple. Suppose that interest rates are exactly right on the assumption that the exchange rate remains (over the forecast horizon) where it is. Now impose an upward skew on anticipated inflation due the anticipation that the exchange rate might fall. This suggests that interest rates should be raised.  But this risks prolonging the assumed overvaluation.  A  bubble-pricking  strategy would lean against the wind in the opposite direction, lowering interest rates in the short term against the anticipation that they would have to be raised when and if this caused the exchange rate to fall. All this raises the credibility issues referred to above  and suggests that a strategy of reacting to large exchange-rate movements only when they occur has considerable attractions. Turning to the question of how policy should react to an exchange-rate change when it does occur, the answer should depend, conventionally, on why it occurred and on the model adopted (as well as, of course, on whether the change is expected to permanent or transitory). That is not terribly helpful and not very transparent. And yet, contingent policies are important in perceptions of the reaction function. The underlying question also relates to the rules literature in terms of whether the rule should include a term in the exchange rate (e.g. Ball, ) and in terms of what aggregate should be targeted. (Thus, Clarida, Gal , and Gertler, , for example, suggest targeting domestic-goods price inflation, thereby excluding the import price component from the CPI, whereas Engel, , suggests targeting the exchange rate.) A natural way of approaching the issue is in terms of the procedures followed by the MPC. In broad terms, it is clear that an exchange-rate depreciation (assumed persistent) would feed through the Bank s forecasting procedures to import prices and thence, directly onto RPI inflation. The pass-through to import prices would lead (ignoring the dynamics) to a step-change upward in the price level. There would be further effects on aggregate demand negatively in the short run because of the effect on real incomes and positively from expenditure switching effects. There would also be potential wage and price pressure as real wage falls were resisted and from effects on inflation expectations. Thus, the prediction that an exchange rate fall would lead (other things being equal) to a compensating rise in real interest rates appears pretty safe on the basis of the target inflation rate set by the Chancellor and the known procedures of the MPC including the characteristics of the Bank s forecasting model, which is published. But are the effects as assumed? Kara and Nelson (), in a paper to be presented at this conference, demonstrate that the stylised facts for the UK are that, whilst there is considerable evidence that exchange-rate pass-through to import prices, there is no correlation with RPIX inflation. (There is much more in the paper but they will speak for themselves). If this is the case, then it throws doubt on whether there would be a large effect on RPIX inflation from an exchange-rate fall, should it occur. Any practical forecaster knows the potential importance of  deterministic shifts . In an important sense, there is little that can be done about them since they are unforecastable from within the model. If they do occur, forecasts will go wrong. There is, however, an extremely important question about how quickly they are detected and how quickly they are taken into account. In the MPC process, for example, a large proportion of the time is typically spent on the question of whether new data should be treated as  noise  or  news  and, if the latter, what should be done about it. The response might be an intercept Forecasting errors have been an important reason for major policy errors in the past   for example in the late s in the UK, There is also a developing debate as to whether over-optimistic or, for that matter, over-pessimistic assessments of productivity performance have been a feature of US experience since the mid-s. An important question, however, is whether a well-functioning system should operate to moderate the effects of possible systematic forecasting errors. In principle it should. The basic point is that, with a high frequency policy-making process, targeted on future inflation, forecasting errors should reveal themselves, triggering appropriate reactions. In the ordinary course of events this means that policy errors, due to poor data or forecast mistakes, should not cumulate. A mistake made one month should not be repeated the next and, arguably, so long as the error is not great, does not matter very much. With systematic errors, the process is more complicated and it is useful to illustrate what I have in mind in the simple case of a shift in a parameter such as the equilibrium unemployment rate. Suppose it has shifted down. Undetected, this leads to too high an interest rate, and inflation should start to undershoot. If the same error is repeated, systematic undershooting would be observed whilst forecasts further out would indicate, period by period, that the interest rate was appropriate. It would not lead, however, to cumulatively expanding error as might be expected on the basis of the mis- assessment of the equilibrium unemployment rate, as the starting-point is updated each month. Moreover, it should trigger responses, such as intercept adjustments and reassessments of model properties, which should work to curtail and eliminate the systematic error. The crucial point is that the forecasting system itself needs to react quickly and appropriately to the signals provided by the economy. The authorities are committed to an objective for inflation, not to a particular forecasting model or set of procedures (Svensson, ). A potential difficulty is that the economy may not give good signals. It has been suggested, on these grounds, that with successful policies of low inflation leading to rather flat Phillips curve responses policy needs to react to other indicators, for example to prospects for demand or unemployment (Begg et al., ) A low-inflation environment with high inertia may also increase the likelihood of bubbles in asset prices and other cumulative phenomena because, with the authorities focussed on inflation, interest-rate responses appear unlikely to market participants. It is clear that forecasting needs to be seen as a process and as one that adapts through time. The role of forecasts in the policy process varies greatly between different systems. In the US, a staff forecast and assessment is available to members of the FOMC and is one input into the decision making process. In the UK, however, the MPC is responsible for the Inflation Report and the forecasts. The process is iterative or back and forth (Vickers, ) between Bank of England staff and the MPC. It is well recognised that nine MPC members are unlikely to agree on prospects for inflation, yet alone on the details, and they are intended to represent the centre of gravity of individual views. The iterative and interactive process is widely regarded as an extremely important part of the formation of policy in the UK. Clearly, though, it raises intricate issues about the exact status of forecasts as well as other difficulties issues detailed in a report by Don Kohn of the Federal Reserve (now a member of the FOMC) (Kohn, ). With an interactive process such as that in the UK the choice of models and procedures is particularly important. (There is an ongoing programme of model development and a new model with radically-improved theoretical structure is close to completion). But how should models be chosen and what kinds of models should be used? In practical terms, there may be a tension between theoretical sophistication and the needs of the interactive process of forecasting and assessment - which can be seen as mirroring the point made above that the best forecasting model may not be the best policy model and vice versa. The establishment of a monetary policy reaction function clearly does not mean that other aspects of policy are unimportant in inflation control and in stabilisation. Quite the contrary, it remains the overall stance of macroeconomic policy that matters. I concentrate here on some obvious aspects of the interaction with fiscal policy. First, it is now part of the consensus that there is not much hope of establishing a credible monetary policy reaction function if fiscal policy is out of control e.g., in the sense of involving an explosive debt/GDP ratio. The Governor of the Bank of Canada argues, for example, that, in Canada, the new monetary arrangements only started to work as intended with major changes in the fiscal framework (Dodge, ).  He also supports the view that, in a single country with monetary and fiscal arrangements being designed together, coordination difficulties should not arise a view also put forward by the UK Treasury (Balls and O Donnell, ). None of this means, of course, that coordination difficulties between monetary and fiscal policy-making institutions could not arise under different circumstances and it begs the question of what an appropriate fiscal framework should look like. and prudent level, which is usually interpreted as a target for the debt ratio of less than %. Second, there is (in practical terms) agreement too that fiscal policy should have a stabilisation role in the short term, usually involving the pragmatic compromise of allowing the automatic stabilisers to work  over the cycle ; whilst discretionary fiscal action is frowned upon on the grounds that it has, in the past, frequently proved to be destabilising. There are other aspects of fiscal policy that are important. For example, forecasts often embody the assumption that public expenditure is cash-limited i.e, set in nominal terms an institutional structure implying real expenditure reductions in the face of upward price shocks. Thus, whilst the  fiscal policy reaction function , like the interest-rate reaction function, combines longer-term commitment with a role in short-term macroeconomic stabilisation, it remains, in policy discussions, a relatively underdeveloped concept. For short-term forecasting and assessment, fiscal policy is, not surprisingly, normally treated as an exogenous input. Bean (b) has suggested that, in a system such as that in the UK, the fiscal authorities are effectively in the position of a Stackelberg leader, free to set fiscal policy but constrained by the monetary policy reaction function (which operates at high frequency compared with fiscal policy). Formal coordination is not necessary so long as the interest-rate reaction function is predictable. This means that fiscal policy cannot generate surprise inflation and deals with a potential time-inconsistency problem. There could however, be a coordination problem relating to the policy mix if, for example, the fiscal authorities saw advantage in a loose fiscal policy combined with higher interest rates (and a higher exchange rate) than otherwise (Allsopp and Vines, ). Clearly, the optimal monetary policy reaction function needs to take account of the fiscal system in operation. For example, if automatic stabilisers are allowed to operate, and if these help offset demand shocks, less work needs to be done by the monetary authorities. Formal analysis of fiscal policy rules is also relatively underdeveloped compared with that of monetary policy rules reflecting the consensus referred to earlier that it is monetary policy that that should be assigned to the twin aims of providing a nominal anchor and stabilisation. It was, of course, not always so. Under the Bretton Woods system, with monetary policy outside the US assigned to meeting the exchange rate objectives, the stabilisation role was assigned to fiscal  fine-tuning , which fell into disrepute, partly because the evidence suggested, in the UK at least, that it was frequently destabilising (Dow, ), and partly because the system failed to provide a nominal anchor against rising inflation. Optimal fiscal policy is likely, however, to become an increasing concern within countries who are members of EMU. It is interesting in this respect that a recent Swedish report by a group of experts (Committee on Stabilisation Policy, ), studying the implications of possible EMU entry, recommends giving a substantial public role regarding stabilisation decisions to a fiscal policy council. The arguments used draw heavily on the monetary policy rules literature. In principle (though there may be strong objections in practice), fiscal instruments could be used to support a non-accommodating policy against inflation as well. ###newline###  I have argued that monetary policy in the UK has succeeded in setting up a reaction function which is recognisably of the appropriate type. I have also suggested that the new system should be reasonably robust, largely because its design reflects both the lessons of history and some of the main insights from the policy rules literature. Performance so far has been good indeed, remarkable by historical standards. However, though the system has survived some considerable shocks, there remains an important sense in which it has not been tested in adversity. So far, the accent has been on stabilisation. The MPC has not yet been called on to react to a major increase in inflationary pressure, threatening the nominal anchor objective, which would involve decisive and, presumably, unpopular action. Yet the perception that such action would be taken, if necessary, is a crucial part of the system. The hope, of course, is that the commitment to take such action if necessary makes it less likely that it will be necessary. I have noted that, in normal times, the perceived reaction function should stabilise expectations of both inflation and of growth. The confidence that policy will work in a particular way alters the way the economy works (including perceptions of risk). To an extent,  thinking makes it so , and the private sector does much of the work via the effect of the policy framework on expectations. A rather dramatic illustration of how the system can function is provided by experience since the end of last year. After the previous cuts, policy interest rates have remained completely unchanged this year in the US, the euro area, and in the UK. Whilst this looks like central bank inertia of an extreme kind, the anticipation of policy interest rate rises which were strongly present with the bounce in the US economy at the beginning of the year has gone away (especially following the large stock market falls across the world, though much of that probably reflected the same re-evaluation of prospects). In the process, the yield curve has shifted, and there has been a market-induced offsetting reaction, first to improving and then to deteriorating prospects. Effectively, monetary policy has eased, despite no change in policy rates. In my view, this shows a system that is alive and well, even though actual policy decisions have resulted in no change in official rate settings. The crucial point is that the private sector can anticipate stabilising policy reactions and, in broad terms, believes they will work as intended. The system requires a high degree of credibility or trust which could be threatened from several directions.  Clearly, credibility would be threatened if the policy-makers were seen to be likely to cheat.  Equally, however, it would be threatened if policy-makers were perceived to be incompetent, or to lack appropriate instruments.  (This latter worry is one of the reasons why the possibility of deflation with nominal interest rates reaching their lower bound, as in Japan, is worrying.)  The better the system functions and the more public understanding of how it is supposed to function, the more credible it is likely to become. I have discussed a number of issues of current concern. One of these is asset prices. I have subscribed to the  received wisdom  that generally it is neither necessary nor desirable for interest rates to respond to asset prices except to the extent that they contribute to inflationary or deflationary pressures, but with the recognition that there could be cases where diverting the interest-rate instrument to reducing particular kinds of shocks could be justified on second-best cost benefit grounds if destabilising shocks can thereby be reduced. Considerations of credibility hard enough to establish anyway  weigh heavily against such policies. A far better strategy would be to tackle the destabilising dynamic processes, e.g. those involved in bubble-type phenomena, more directly with other policies. There is a worry, however, that the perception that economic policy will not react to phenomena such as asset-price bubbles or exchange-rate misalignments might encourage the phenomena themselves. This is most likely to be the case if there is a perceived  disconnect  between the phenomena and prospects for growth and inflation since then the interest rate consequences implicit in the normal reaction function are, in effect, shorted out, making destabilising cumulative processes the more likely. There are historical instances, for example, where  benign neglect  of the exchange rate (with the concentration of policy on the domestic economy) has appeared to lead to exchange-rate misalignments and instability. This is not to argue for giving a special role to asset prices in inflation targeting, still less should it be seen as an argument for altering the target. It should serve, however, to reinforce the point that the successful establishment of an inflation-targeting regime does not mean that all macroeconomic policy problems are dealt with. On the contrary, it is likely to highlight other aspects of the overall policy regime. This is particularly true with fiscal policy. There is consensus that a credible monetary policy requires a credible fiscal framework to go with it. So far, however, research on fiscal policy reaction functions seems relatively underdeveloped. Finally, if I were asked what would make the most difference to the procedures of practical monetary policy-making, it would be better and more reliable data and better understanding of key economic relationships. Given the uncertainties, the process of assessment and forecasting is bound to be judgemental and in that sense, not rule-like. But if the goals are clear and the process is open and transparent, it is, to a large extent predictable, which is what matters for the stabilisation of expectations.