 When, ten years ago, Mervyn King delivered a lecture to mark the fifth anniversary of Tim Congdon s Lombard Street Research, he reviewed ideas on the monetary transmission mechanism and, engaging with part of Tim s substantial contribution over many years, the role of money (and credit) within it. These days most such accounts   including that published by the MPC   begin with a simple assertion that the central bank sets the short-term nominal interest rate.  And they go on to explain how, given sticky wages and prices, that enables the central bank to shift the short-term real interest rate in a way that either restrains or stimulates aggregate demand.  Notice no mention of money here. On this view of the world and, in particular, given this way of implementing monetary policy, money   both narrow and broad   is largely endogenous. The central bank simply supplies whatever amount of base money is demanded by the economy at the prevailing level of interest rates. Depending on the stability of the demand for money, the monetary aggregates can be useful indicators of what is going on in the economy, but they are not necessarily doing anything causal.  This apparent relegation of money in policy debates often troubles policymakers like me who emphasise that monetary policy s main capability is to deliver a medium-term path for nominal variables; and it does not, in fact, logically preclude the existence of an effect working through the quantity of money, via liquidity and other relative risk premia etc. But, in any case, it should not obscure the fact that the very first step of the transmission mechanism   setting a short-term nominal rate   turns precisely on how we manage access to our money. There is a curious lack of interest in how this is done; and occasionally some puzzlement. Indeed, a former Chief Economist of the Bank, Christopher Dow, ended up concluding that it was just some miraculous convention that the banks chose out of politeness to follow. Well, last week we announced plans for the biggest shake up in how we implement monetary policy for at least a quarter of a century. I want to use today s occasion to explain the analysis underlying these reforms. This will involve coming clean about how compromises with the first Thatcher government, during the monetary-base control debate of the very early s, had the unfortunate effect, albeit with a lag, of clouding the Bank s thinking about the feasible role of Open Market Operations in the framework for setting interest rates. On a more positive note, I shall also outline how operationally, our monetary and financial stability roles fit together. ###newline###  Both missions stem from the special nature of our liabilities: central bank money. We are able to implement monetary policy because the economy has a demand for central bank money and, as monopoly suppliers, we can set the terms on which we provide it. The demand for our money is manifested in two ways   holdings of notes, and bankers  balances with us. This reflects structural features of the financial system and, in particular, the way risk is managed in a fractional-reserve banking system. Although some payments are still made using our notes, most are made in commercial bank money (through transfers of deposits). But deposit money is subject to risk. Commercial banks are in the business of providing liquidity insurance to their customers   via deposits withdrawable on demand and via committed loan facilities   and, as such, are themselves inherently susceptible to liquidity crises. In consequence, customers want to be assured that banks can maintain convertibility into central bank money (notes). And banks therefore have to manage their various credit and other risks, including  reinsuring  against their liquidity commitments. Second-tier banks can try to acquire such reinsurance by paying for lines of credit from the largest banks. But the largest banks cannot buy liquidity insurance from each other without incurring an unacceptable level of (contingent) counterparty credit risk. They have to self insure, which they do by holding high-quality assets that can be exchanged at the central bank for  cash    or, rather, for a credit to their account at the central bank. That relates to the second source of demand for central bank money: bankers  balances. For commercial bank money to be used as a means of payment, banks have to settle transfers of deposits amongst themselves. The big banks   ie the so-called settlement banks   settle in Bank of England money, and to that end maintain balances with us. Why is that? If they settled in each other s money, the consequent credit exposures would not be controllable   intra-day or from day to day. To avoid that, they settle payments in the  final settlement asset , central bank money. This makes the system as a whole safer. (It isn t some newfangled thing, by the way.  Since the s, the banks have had increasingly formal arrangements to settle the clearings in Bank of England money   first in notes and then, from  up to today, via deposits held with us.) These sources of demand for our money rely on two preconditions: the integrity of our balance sheet and, in a fiat money system, a decent monetary policy. Without them, agents might drift to using final-settlement assets which could provide an alternative unit of account for the economy.  Neither is currently a worry! Developments in the demand for the two types of central bank money   notes and bankers  balances   drive the shape of our balance sheet: they comprise the bulk of our liabilities. For careful students of the Bank, I should perhaps make it clear at this point that in what follows   and, more important, in our analysis   Issue Department and Banking Department are treated in a completely joined up way. The separation was a central feature of the  Bank Charter Act, which posited that convertibility of our notes into gold was a sufficient specification of a central bank s role. It did not have much merit then, amongst other things because it failed to recognise the importance of bankers  balances; is an aberration in today s fiat money system; and has not affected the high-level architecture of the system we are planning. Broadly, as the economy grows, demand for our notes increases. The banks have to buy the notes from the Bank, and they draw down their balances with us to do so. But that buffer is limited and, in consequence, they are  structurally short , with the Bank having to lend to them (or buy assets from them). At an aggregate level, we do that via open market operations (a term originating from around a century ago). So, in line with double-entry book keeping!, both sides of our balance sheet expand as the demand for our notes expands (Chart ). For what are expected to be permanent increases in the value of notes in issue, the central bank can in principle provide the necessary assistance   ie inject reserves   by buying long-maturity assets, which would be done at market rates. Shorter-term assistance rolls over more frequently, and is typically used by central banks to provide reserves at a rate in line with the policy rate. The difference between notes and total refinancing is accounted for by liabilities arising from bankers  balances, the Bank s capital, central bank deposits etc. An illiquid advance to HM Government. This fluctuated prior to the transfer of responsibility for UK central government cash management to the UK Debt Management Office in April . The Ways and Means balance is now usually constant, varying only very occasionally. Meanwhile, the level of end-of-day balances that bankers want to maintain with the Bank is driven by (i) the rate we pay, which in the past has always been zero, and the rate we charge on overdrafts; and (ii) the precision with which they can manage their payment flows over a day as a whole. The greater their control over payment schedules, and the more effective the Bank is in ensuring that the system as a whole is square, the smaller the end-of-day buffer the banks need in the form of balances with the Bank. The fact that such balances are unremunerated has, in practice, provided a powerful impetus to end-of-day payment system efficiency. The whole system now rests on the banking system targeting aggregate balances of just   million (million not billion), compared with average daily flows in the CHAPS payment system of over   billion (more than three thousand times greater). So although the implementation of monetary policy does depend on banks  demand for our money, they don t seem to demand very much of it! In the framework we are moving to, the influences on the demand for notes will be unaffected, but the bankers  balances regime will change materially. ###newline###  Where are we moving from, and to? First the current system. Its essence is that the dozen or so sterling settlement banks have to maintain non-negative balances with us at close of business each day (the   million mentioned earlier). They receive no interest on positive balances, but incur a penalty rate if overdrawn. The system needs to borrow from the Bank so that the settlement banks can meet their target balances and, thereby, avoid the penalty charge on overdrafts. To that end, each day we publish a forecast of the system s shortage and undertake to make the system square (ie to achieve the   million target). Open market operations (OMOs) with a two-week maturity are conducted each day at the MPC repo rate; the stock of OMO loans outstanding has in recent years typically been around  - billion. There are two rounds of OMOs (.am and .pm) to cater for updates during the day to our forecast of the shortage. Towards the end of the day, there are overnight lending and deposit facilities   broadly, for settlement banks/OMO counterparties   to be sure that the system is  square ; these facilities carry penalty rates in order to induce participation in OMOs. Not all settlement banks are OMO counterparties, and vice versa. OMOs can span MPC dates, so we can have OMO loans outstanding which carry a different rate from that most recently decided by the MPC. The new system will work as follows. A broad range of banks, including all of the settlement banks but going beyond that group, will agree to hold a specified positive balance with the Bank on average over a maintenance period lasting from one MPC meeting to the next. The level of balances targeted will be chosen by individual banks: voluntary reserves. For the first time in its history, the Bank will pay interest on such reserves: at the MPC s repo rate.  The consequent demand for reserves will be met via a weekly OMO with a maturity of one week, and a fine-tuning repo on the final day of the maintenance period. There will be standing lending and deposit facilities available all day to banks generally. On the final day of the maintenance period, these facilities   used if a scheme member would otherwise under or overshoot the target   will carry rates +bp from the MPC s repo rate. Earlier in the maintenance period, the penalties on the standing facilities will be higher, perhaps +bp. If short-term OMOs were ever to span an MPC meeting, we envisage that the rate charged would be indexed to the MPC s rate. All that sounds   and is   rather technical. But, compared with the past couple of decades, the plan reflects a fundamental change in how the Bank thinks about the implementation of monetary policy and the management of our balance sheet more generally, including how we support the stability of the system. This will, I hope, begin to become apparent by my explaining why we need to move away from where we are now. ###newline###  There are three types of problem with the current framework. First, it is overly complex: the system provides for four rounds of operations each day and on most days there are at least two. The end-of-day arrangements are especially elaborate. Second, when the MPC is expected to change rates, the ultra-short maturity rate structure  pivots  in a rather perverse way, because the daily week repos span the MPC meeting but are conducted at the existing rate. For all but the initiated, this makes it harder to decipher expectations from ultra short-term money market rates. And third, the overnight rate is highly volatile by international standards   from day to day, and intra-day (Charts  and ). Although it has typically not affected longer-maturity money market High and low of the day observed by the Bank's dealing desk as a spread to the policy rate. A number of foreign banks, securities houses, corporate treasurers and money managers have told us that these characteristics of the sterling money markets deter their full participation. The volatility may, for example, have impeded the development of the overnight interest-rate swap (derivative) market relative to, say, the euro OIS market. Less tangibly, but importantly, the reputation of the sterling money markets is impaired. How come, some ask, that the Bank has what is regarded by many outside commentators as a state-of-the-art monetary policy regime, is amongst the leading official institutions in financial stability analysis and surveillance, but has such a peculiar core money market? Things were worse before the mid-late-s reforms. Then the Bank had to stop relying on a moribund market (the bill market) and atrophied institutions (the discount houses); the Bank created the gilt repo market (now with nearly   billion outstanding), transitioned out the discount houses, and introduced a (wide) interest-rate corridor for the first time. We do not have an equivalent crisis now, and we have therefore been able to step back and consider the framework more fundamentally and in the light of our high-level objectives. We made those objectives clear in the paper we published on  May (Annex ). ###newline###  The primary objective is to stabilise short-term rates at the policy rate. Up to now, there has probably been a fairly widespread perception that, by conducting OMOs at a two-week maturity, the Bank has aimed to steer, or even set, money market rates at a two-week maturity. Prior to , the Bank s daily OMOs routinely included outright purchases of bills out to a maturity of one month, and occasionally three months, encouraging a perception that the Bank wished to steer rates at those maturities. In fact, the maturity of a central bank s OMOs and the maturity of the rate(s) it aims to steer/set need not be bound together in that way. At times, a clear distinction does not seem to have been made between the maturities at which the Bank sought to set rates and the maturities at which the market rate would be determined by market expectations of the future path of the official policy rate. Under monetary regimes where policy decisions were not taken and announced regularly, such a distinction was harder to make as the horizon to the next decision was uncertain. But whatever the validity or otherwise of the idea that the Bank was, under past regimes, using its operations to steer rates at two-weeks, one-month or whatever, it is not what we should be doing now. And, in truth, it has been less appropriate since the early-s, when in a series of steps the authorities introduced the system of deciding and announcing the level of the official interest rate on a regular monthly timetable. All we can, and should, do is set the interest rate up to the next MPC meeting   a period of up to a month or so immediately after an MPC meeting, but eventually of just one day. Beyond the next MPC meeting, money market rates should be determined by what market participants expect the MPC to decide. Hence our objective is to have a basically flat curve, at the MPC s rate, out to the next MPC meeting. The market in overnight money would then be used by banks for liquidity management but not to speculate on the rate. Amongst other things, this means eliminating pivoting when an MPC rate change is expected. That should be straightforward. It entails not operating at a fixed rate beyond the next MPC meeting, which can be achieved either by simply not operating at all beyond the next MPC, or via any such operations being at a market-determined rate or indexed to the prevailing MPC rate. I have not yet quite specified which market rate we are targeting. In the sterling markets, central bank money and commercial bank money are exchangeable at par, and so one cannot identify a  market interest rate on central bank money . Rather, we are interested in influencing, via arbitrage, the rates on those money market instruments carrying the lowest possible credit risk, with the market determining credit risk premia on other instruments and transactions. In routine circumstances, the Bank is not trying directly to influence the price of assets taken as collateral in our open market operations, which these days are effected via repo. Although technically a purchase and resale of securities, the securities exchanged in our repos play no role in setting policy. They are nevertheless vital, as they constitute the collateral securing the Bank s credit exposure to its counterparties. ###newline###  In terms of the overriding objective of stabilising ultra-short interest rates at the MPC s rate, the key is to ensure that we are both the marginal supplier and taker of  reserves . In theory, there are two possible ways of achieving this. One is to use OMOs to adjust the quantity of reserves to bring about the desired short-term interest rate, implicitly or explicitly drawing on an identified demand schedule. Neither in the past nor in the current review have we even briefly entertained the notion that this is realistic. The alternative way for the central bank to establish itself as the rate setter is to be prepared to supply (or absorb) whatever liquidity the market demands at its chosen rate(s). The most precise way of doing this is through so-called  standing facilities  in which the central bank lends (secured) whatever is demanded at a fixed rate or takes on deposit whatever is supplied at a fixed rate. This points to the underlying problems with the Bank s current system. On their own, OMOs are not sufficient to make the Bank the rate setter if, as now, they are used simply to offset the market s net liquidity need given a specified maintenance requirement. This is the first fundamental flaw of the Bank s current system. Broadly, at present a single OMO counterparty can take our money   so that the system is square vis- -vis the Bank   and seek to influence the market overnight rate by trading at a different rate from the Bank s rate (up to the boundaries formed by the current wide corridor). A mistaken emphasis on OMOs as  setting the rate , rather than on standing facilities, has been one precondition for the volatility in the sterling overnight rate. So a first basic design principle is that a well-constructed system involves the possibility of gross intermediation across the central bank s balance sheet. Divergence of the market rate from the MPC s rate can be caused by a maldistribution of liquidity among institutions (accidentally so or through deliberate hoarding). If the market rate diverges from our rate, the banks that are having to pay/receive the  wrong  rate should be able to come to the Bank. At present, however, only relatively few banks   the settlement banks and OMO counterparties   have access to the Bank s standing facilities. This is the second fundamental flaw of the current system. Furthermore, the penalty on intermediating via the Bank s balance sheet should not be too great; otherwise  victim  banks may prefer the costs of rate volatility and/or persistent tightness or softness in rates. The rates on the Bank s current  facilities  are  basis points apart. To have closer control over rates using standing facilities, the Bank s interest rate  corridor  needs to be narrower. A second basic design principle, therefore, is that access to intermediation via the Bank s balance sheet needs to be widespread and at an unprohibitive price. There are lots of ways of satisfying those basic design principles. At a high level of generality, the Bank could be the marginal player/price setter in a system where banks actually intermediate across our balance sheet. But we could also achieve that in a so-called  corridor system  where the rates on lending and deposit facilities provide a corridor for market rates; most intermediation occurs via the interbank market at prices within the corridor; and  symmetry , which I shall explain later, delivers a market rate equal to the mid-point of the corridor, chosen of course to be the MPC s rate. The limiting case is for the Bank to give every bank access to borrow (against collateral, o/a credit risk) or deposit in unlimited quantities overnight at the MPC s rate, ie a zero corridor. With identical lending and borrowing rates, there would be no (overnight) interbank market as the intermediaries could not even recover the bid-offer spread. This would distort ultra short-term money markets, and possibly collateral markets (because the Bank lends against high quality collateral and so at times would hold large amounts of it); would cause major and unpredictable day-to-day fluctuations in the size of our balance sheet; and apply no premium for the backstop liquidity insurance provided to banks via the standing lending facility. Our preference is to design a framework that can achieve our monetary policy/volatility objectives while leaving open the possibility of a private market in short-term money. To achieve those goals, we do not need a system that entails that the Bank is the only intermediary in overnight money   as overseas systems demonstrate. Other central banks have, in fact, achieved their goals for managing central bank money in a variety of ways. One group   the ECB, the Fed   use  reserve averaging . Indeed, it has sometimes been suggested that the fundamental flaw in the UK s current system is that it has a one-day maintenance period. Analytically, that is not the fundamental flaw, as I hope is clear from my earlier remarks on OMOs. And empirically, a number of central banks   notably Australia, Canada, New Zealand   have achieved rate stability with a same-day system (Chart ). The Bank s new system will involve both. Rates will be set at the MPC s rate using the technology of a same-day narrow-corridor system. But by employing averaging, we should need a narrow corridor to steer rates only once every so often, not every day. In an averaging system, a member bank has to maintain a required level of reserves on average over the maintenance period. During the maintenance period, banks are free to draw on or build up their balance at the central bank in order to meet the average required over the period. Such day-to-day fluctuations attract no penalty, so there is in effect no  turn . In principle, market rates are smoothed   a martingale is established   by scheme banks varying their balances with the central bank rather than borrowing/lending in the market whenever the market rate diverges from their central expectation of the market rate that will prevail on the final day of the maintenance period; that is, the rate at which they expect to be able to  square  up to meet their reserves target by lending or borrowing in the market on the final day. In consequence, averaging in principle establishes a flat curve through the maintenance period, with the rate expected on the final day fed back to earlier days via arbitrage. That leaves the central bank with the task of establishing its rate on the final day of the maintenance period, so that the flat curve is at the central bank s rate not some other rate. It is the same task as in a same-day maintenance system. And it is also why most averaging systems exhibit UK-style volatility on their final day (Chart ). But we believe that should be avoidable, by employing the technology of the best same-day systems. Narrow-corridor systems not only put bounds on market rates, they also influence where rates will be within the corridor. Provided the banking system as a whole is square, the excess balances of  long  banks by definition offset the deficit balances of  short  banks. The former face a choice between lending in the market or depositing their excess with the central bank at a discount (say bp) to the official repo rate.  The latter,  short  banks face a choice between borrowing in the market or from the central bank at a premium (say bp) to the official repo rate. The cost of using the facilities depends on where the market rate is within the corridor. If, for example, the market rate were above the mid-point of the corridor, it would be relatively expensive to use the deposit facility but cheaper to use the borrowing facility, so banks would be more willing to run the risk of being short. They would, therefore, lend more in the market, which would tend to soften the market rate, helping to bring it back towards the middle of the corridor. Somewhat more exactly, the pre-conditions for such symmetry are (i) central bank operations being expected to offset, with balanced risks, the market s net quantity shortage/surplus relative to the maintenance requirement; (ii) a market that distributes reserves efficiently; and (iii) genuine symmetry in using the two standing facilities, including no  shame  in using the borrowing facility. In the Bank s new framework, the first of these conditions will be met via OMOs (made easier, possibly, by expressing the maintenance requirement as a small range). To help meet condition (ii) we plan to have a narrow corridor on the final day of the maintenance period. In theory, symmetry is consistent with a corridor of any width.  In practice, nearly all such systems have a narrow corridor (+  bp). That is what we plan to employ. A narrow corridor will reduce the returns from any efforts to drive the market rate away from its midpoint. It will also reduce the cost to any potential victim banks of taking defensive action by using the Bank s standing facilities rather than the market to square their books, which would reduce the incentive for other banks to try to influence the market rate in the first place. This kind of system has been used to great effect by New Zealand, Australia and Canada (Chart ). Like setting policy in terms of interest rates rather than base money ( i  rather than  m ), and inflation targeting, its basis has since been set out formally by the academic community. As Keynes might perhaps have said, academic economists are often the scrupulous tidiers up after some obscure practitioner in a small country (in this case, Antipodean). So the Bank of England s new system will employ both a narrow corridor and averaging. But how will we ensure that there is  enough  averaging for the martingale to hold? The banking system s net liquidity need is affected not only by the Bank s monetary operations but also by all the other flows between us and the market, not all of which are directly controlled (notably the ebb and flow of bank notes, which the Bank supplies on demand)   these are generally referred to by central banks as  autonomous factors . In order to prevent scheme banks  balances at the Bank going into overdraft, another part of the Bank s balance sheet must adjust in a way that offsets movements in these autonomous factors. In principle, there are two ways of delivering this. Either the central bank conducts OMOs with sufficient frequency and size to offset autonomous flows that would otherwise put the banking system into overdraft. That is the Bank s current approach and, in effect, that of the Federal Reserve, which conducts OMOs most days. Alternatively, the central bank has to ensure that the aggregate reserves held with it are sufficient to absorb the largest foreseeable fluctuations in autonomous factors. We are adopting the second approach, which is also employed by the ECB. For that reason we will pay the repo rate on reserves.  In a system of voluntary reserves, anything less could lead to material fluctuations in demand depending on how our remuneration rate compared to the return on other asset classes.  Since the cost of obtaining the reserves via OMOs will also be the MPC s repo rate, the demand will in theory be unlimited. We will therefore apply ceilings   possibly expressed as a percentage of so-called  eligible liabilities , and set at a level that, in aggregate, can absorb the volatility of the autonomous flows. I should also probably note that by fully remunerating reserves, there is no tax on the banking system. There is not, therefore, the tiniest residue of schemes used elsewhere in the past designed to put a wedge between deposit and loan rates and so control monetary growth by raising the cost of bank intermediation. It is important to be clear about what OMOs will and won t be doing in the new set up. As now, they will not be used to inject a quantity of reserves according to a plan for the path of the monetary base. And they will not be used directly to adjust the quantity of base money to bring about the desired level of short-term interest rates. In other words, base money comprises neither a target nor an instrument of policy. Rather, the role of OMOs will be to satisfy the system s targeted level of reserves over the maintenance period as a whole. To that end, there will be a weekly repo which, reflecting feedback during the consultative period, will be for a one-week maturity. In addition, we plan to conduct a round of overnight OMOs as a matter of routine on the final day of the maintenance period, which will allow us to adjust for any changes in our forecast of the system s position (relative to the maintenance requirement) between the last weekly OMO and the end of the maintenance period. This routine fine-tuning operation is one novel feature of our plan. All short-term repos will, as now, be at the MPC s rate. That is for clarity. Technically, the rate could be determined by a tender, but we wish to rule out speculation about whether the result of a tender revealed anything about the MPC s rate intentions. These proposed changes   and, in particular, the introduction of remunerated reserves to absorb fluctuations in the  autonomous factors  during the maintenance period   will, therefore, affect the frequency of our OMOs, which have been daily for as long as anyone can remember. The official Bank historians report that, since the s at least, the Bank placed great weight on being close to market conditions.  That remains as true as ever   not just of the sterling money markets but of financial markets generally, as the Governor recently underlined when discussing our Market Intelligence function. To my mind, being  in  markets frequently can aid intelligence-gathering if the activity is discretionary. By contrast, both today s OMOs, and those under the new system, are mechanical, and so conducting OMOs each day does not of itself yield intelligence. We do not, therefore, think that moving to weekly OMOs should impair the flow of intelligence to the Bank; and we shall take great efforts to stay in touch with all parts of the market so that it doesn t. The introduction of remunerated reserves will, though, bring changes. In particular, it will almost certainly cause the Bank s balance sheet to grow. Rather than the   million currently held, we envisage that the banking system will hold sufficient reserves to absorb the autonomous factors   measured in terms of billions of pounds (at least). Other things being equal, this would simply get added to the current  - billion of refinancing, provided via OMOs, which offsets the banking sector s structural short position. In fact, we will need to consider whether it will be more sensible to separate the provision of reserves needed to meet the reserves target from the offsetting of the system s longer-term short position resulting, essentially, from secular growth in the note issue. It may be that part of the latter could be injected via longer-term lending, say through the purchase of longer-term government securities. The Bank would be a rate-taker in any such official operations, which would be akin to the Federal Reserve s purchases of long-maturity Treasury bonds (sometimes known as  coupon passes ). We will, of course, consult the market on this (if we take it forward at all). The point of mentioning it here is to make clear that, once one separates the concept of OMOs from rate setting, it is no longer axiomatic that all official market operations should be at very short maturities. What is axiomatic is that the framework will be clear and transparent. ###newline###  The role of OMOs in our plans marks a big departure from the system employed in various manifestations since , which appears to have relied on OMOs to set rates. But, at least as employed, they can t. This has prompted us to examine how this state of affairs came about.   .. we regard the Bank Rate [lending] as our principal weapon for carrying [that] policy into effect  .. open market operations .. are merely part of the machinery by which the weapon of the Bank Rate is made efficient.  last resort, it is at Bank Rate. The other method, of buying in bills is  . putting out cash in exchange for securities.  The classical system described by Harvey and O Brien was based on what might be called  half a corridor . Our reform plans are, therefore, in some respects a descendent of the classical system. We too propose to use OMOs simply to steer the quantities, and hence the probability that the market will find itself using penal facilities. But there are differences. We will not be leaving the market guessing as to whether or not we will supply sufficient liquidity to make the market square: we will offset the autonomous factors. And our new system will work by aiming to have the market rate in the middle of the corridor rather than, as in the classical system, by occasionally forcing the market rate to the (upper) edge of the corridor. But the crucial point is that the ancien regime knew what it was doing, and didn t imagine that the OMOs set rates. Given the strength of induction in the Bank, where one generation learns in a critical way from another, this makes the ensuing regime hard to fathom   at first sight. Part of the answer lies in the political economy, and ideological monetarism, of the s and early s; and part in not adapting the framework to a profoundly altered overall monetary regime during the s. In separate acts of folly a quarter of a century or so ago, the monetary authorities sought to hide the fact that they were setting rates. In the s, Minimum Lending Rate (MLR) replaced Bank Rate. This was not just relabelling, as MLR was supposed to float with market-determined Treasury bill rates, not least because that would disguise the hand of the authorities behind a tightening of credit conditions if they wanted to restrain demand. In the s, a welcome emphasis on monetary variables was fallaciously argued by some to entail that policy should be implemented via a path for the monetary base, with the outcome being a messy compromise. In both episodes OMOs came to have greater apparent significance because, with Bank Rate/MLR downgraded, the authorities sometimes used the rates in a round of OMOs to institute   that is, to signal   a change in the market rate desired by policymakers. Because the logic of the actual system was so obscure, when economists wanted to conceptualise what was going on, they used simple text-book style models. This is nicely illustrated by Chart , which seeks to make a straightforward point about the choice between controlling the price or quantity of our money. When demand for money shifts from AA* to BB*, either the extra demand is accommodated at an unchanged interest rate (X) or, alternatively, the price (interest rate) must rise to Y if supply is held fixed at Z. Since the Bank knew it was not operating MBC (fixing the quantity of money at Z), we had to be in the rate-setting version of the model, and so we had to be the marginal supplier of  cash  at our chosen rate. There are many problems with this story.  First, the Bank was, in fact, targeting a fixed (but adjustable) level of reserves (bank balances with us )   so we were, somehow, controlling both the rate and the quantity! Second, even when notes as well as bankers  balances are taken into account, we know that we can change the policy rate without having directly and immediately to alter the quantity of central bank money. Related to that, a further problem with the set up is that the demand for central bank money depends not simply on the absolute level of the short-term risk-free interest rate but on where it is relative to the expected returns on other assets (the opportunity cost), which themselves may not be independent of monetary policy. The Bank s thinking had, moreover, drifted into blurring the distinction between OMOs and standing facilities, except that the Bank thought of OMOs as modern and market-friendly. And, most important, because   as economists   we knew we ought to be supplying marginal liquidity at our chosen rate, we slipped into thinking that that was   surely had to be   what we were actually doing. So, ipso facto, the OMOs were setting rates. policy. Quite separately from debates about OMOs, the UK moved to a monetary regime where signals via the Bank s operations were not needed and, indeed, would be counterproductive. Our reform plans have been developed with that in mind, and so with the aim that the framework itself should stabilise the market rate in the middle of the corridor rather than relying on the Bank s ability to take the rate to the corridor s edges. ###newline###  Discussion of the classical system, introduced when the UK was on the gold standard; of the confusion sown by the debate about monetary-base control; and of the redundancy of using operations to signal policy in a world where the policy rate is periodically decided and announced and where policy makers  view of the monetary transmission mechanism and their reaction function are transparently communicated   all of this might imply that there has been a clear and robust relationship between the authorities  overall monetary regime and the framework for implementing policy. In fact, that does not appear to be the case, judging from Chart . Much the same has been found by others. This is puzzling. The classical system   of daily OMOs, with the options of forcing market rates up to Bank Rate and of changing Bank Rate between the Court s weekly meetings   does seem reasonably well suited to the gold standard regime, with its threat of external drain. The market rate sometimes needed to be adjusted at short notice  with the object either of preventing gold from leaving the country, or of attracting gold to the country . Consistent with this, Governor Norman and his colleagues are recorded as having pored over the gold position every day. In theory at least, the same goes for any external money anchor, such as the ERM. It is striking that when the UK joined the ERM in , a good deal was made of its not implying a significant change in the way monetary policy was set or implemented. It could be argued that the overnight rate needed to move to whatever level was needed to stay in the ERM band, and a daily maintenance system should, in principle, have facilitated that. In fact, that was not how policy was operated, reflecting the UK authorities  stress on the ultimate objectives of policy rather than the intermediate means of pursuing them provided by the ERM. By contrast, various other ERM members did base their policy framework on being able to influence their exchange rate via very close control of ultra- short-term market interest rates   but some of them had averaging schemes, which on the face of it might have afforded them relatively little day-to-day purchase on the overnight rate. The overall historical picture is not especially coherent. I suggest that the question of whether, desirably or even optimally, there might be some mapping from monetary regimes to operating frameworks warrants research by the academic community. In one respect, however, the evolution of the Bank s operating system does seem to have tracked the evolution of the overall monetary regime   the precision with which rates are set. This is another area where more research would be useful but some preliminary propositions can be advanced, if only to be knocked down.  My impression from Chart  is that during the s the Bank was fairly relaxed about the spread between Bank Rate and the market rate; that during the s and the early s, when monetary policy was assigned a minimal role in macroeconomic management, the spread could at times be measured in terms of percentage points; and through the s, when direct credit controls were employed, the authorities seem also to have been fairly indifferent to the range between maximum and minimum market rates. I have already touched on the peculiarities of the s and the early s. During the s, and more recently, we have become more concerned about the relationship between official and market rates. I conjecture, but cannot yet demonstrate, that these patterns have something to do with the monetary regime of the day. What is clear is that in our current monetary regime, we need precision. To date, the smallest change in the MPC s rate has been bp and members of the Committee each spend a great deal of time deciding the level of rates we individually want rounded to the nearest bp. The Bank s operating framework needs to deliver that precision. The new framework will make that apparent through the overnight rate. But, as a matter of routine, we revisit the policy rate once a month not every day. So perhaps at long last, we are planning an operating framework that matches the overall regime. ###newline###  This brings me to the connections between the framework for implementing monetary policy, and financial stability. Here too, our planned changes should bring some significant improvements. A key financial stability concern is to ensure that the central bank can meet increases in demand for reserves that are either system-wide or, depending on the cause, from individual banks. Either may be needed to avoid a banking system panic having systemic effects: as part of our responsibilities for providing the economy s final settlement asset, we need to be prepared to expand our balance sheet when commercial banks might otherwise be under pressure to contract theirs.  Neither need interfere with monetary policy. Indeed, it is important that a system-wide increase in the demand for reserves should be accommodated in order to keep interest rates stable (it is akin to a velocity shock). And idiosyncratic increases in demand can be offset through adjustments to the (net) provision or withdrawal of reserves to/from the rest of the system via routine operations. A well- designed framework will cater for this. The current UK system does not do so as effectively as it might. First, it makes no provision for the banking system as a whole routinely to change the level of reserves that it wants to hold   except via banks acquiring more Bank of England notes from us to hold in their tills. Technically, we could increase the targeted level of end-of-day balances; and we can, of course, always simply inject reserves    excess  to the maintenance requirement   by buying securities. But there is no routine mechanism for the settlement banks themselves to seek such an increase and they may well be deterred from doing so by the lack of remuneration. The new framework will improve on this in a number of ways. Individual banks   and so the banking system in aggregate   will be able periodically to adjust the level of reserves they are targeting. And, during a maintenance period, they will if necessary be able to hold excess reserves. In terms of idiosyncratic demand-for-money shocks, we currently have specific machinery for routine liquidity provision (against high-quality collateral) only to the settlement banks (and, for part of the day, OMO counterparties); no other banks have a routinely available mechanism to borrow against collateral from the Bank (even at a penal rate). Furthermore, the overnight lending facility is available only up to the Bank s forecast of the system s residual net shortage (relative to the daily maintenance requirement) after the OMOs. As well as these design faults impeding the achievement of a stable overnight rate in the ways described earlier, they may at the margin hinder a smooth response to stressed conditions. Other central banks have penal collateralised Lombard facilities (or  discount windows ) in place for all banks all of the time. Our new framework will have this feature. But period averaging permits a useful refinement. On the final day of the maintenance period, the corridor will be +bp around the repo rate, but earlier in the maintenance period the rate charged can be more penal. Partly because the way in which banks manage their liquidity affects the payment system and the routine demand for our reserves, and partly because the Bank might be called upon to supply emergency liquidity support (outside of our standard operational framework), we have a legitimate interest in the way that liquidity is managed by banks and across the system as a whole. Other things being equal, our aim is to have a framework that encourages disciplined private sector liquidity monitoring and management, as a contribution to reducing the likelihood of central bank emergency intervention. That points to not giving the banks such easy/cheap access to central bank liquidity as to cause their own front-office/treasury liquidity-management capabilities to atrophy or market disciplines to be eroded. And that, in turn, points to  discount window  lending being available only at penal rates, perhaps +bp relative to repo (and to overdrafts being more penal still, as a bank in overdraft has failed to manage its liquidity during the day). A final point needs to be added about standing facilities and the Bank s financial stability mandate. For at least thirty years, and probably longer, academic economists and other commentators have debated whether routine LOLR lending (to clearly solvent banks) should be effected via OMOs rather than via the discount window (or standing facilities), arguing that such lending should be made available only to clearly sound banks and that bilateral lending is therefore not needed: OMOs are sufficient. The part of the argument about lending only to sound banks is irrelevant here as our routine operations are with counterparties that can pledge high-quality collateral. But the argument that only OMOs are needed to meet the liquidity needs of manifestly sound banks is flawed. In the first place, in stressed conditions with widespread nervousness about counterparty risk, a sound bank may create unwarranted apprehension about its position if, because of (actual or perceived) problems elsewhere, it is unusually short of funds and attempts to borrow unusually large amounts in the market, even against collateral. It can avoid risking that unnecessarily adverse reaction by using the central bank s standing facility, paying the penalty rate. The central bank does not need an informational advantage; and, because it is not itself vulnerable to a run, it is not induced to overreact as a consequence of needing to preserve reserves to maintain the integrity of its own balance sheet. Separately, and I believe decisively, the argument makes the rather splendid assumption that the money markets are always open and functioning properly. The tragic events of / underline that that cannot be guaranteed. OMOs rely on markets to distribute liquidity to where it is needed. Lending facilities can do the job directly   quite apart from being needed to provide a corridor for rate setting. In short, the Bank s new system, with better-designed standing facilities, will better support both our monetary and financial stability missions. In doing so, it will take us further in the direction of Bagehot s precept that, so far as possible, central banks should make clear in advance their preparedness to advance liquidity, against collateral and at a penal rate, in stressed conditions. Since Bagehot s day, a lot of the central bank lending that was then discretionary has become  hard coded  in to the operating framework. As was clear from the remark of Chief Cashier O Brien I quoted earlier, that was true of the old  late lending  window for the discount houses; and it is true, today, of the lending facilities for the settlement banks. The new system s standing facilities will improve on those arrangements in the way I have described. From time to time, there will be transient effects on the size of our balance sheet. In the current set up, the net provision of reserves pretty well always equals the gross provision, because the scale of our operations is typically limited by our forecast of the system s net shortage. But that will not be axiomatic in the new world, where gross provision could diverge from net provision by virtue of the standing facilities being used. We see no difficulty with that. ###newline###  Both those points   about  hard coding  lending facilities and fluctuations in our balance sheet   already apply during the day by virtue of our provision of intra-day liquidity to the settlement bank members of the real-time gross-settlement (RTGS) wholesale payment system. All of our RTGS lending is bilateral, and so gross. As a result, our balance sheet is bigger during the day than at the close of business (Chart ). This is all in the cause of avoiding massive daylight credit exposures amongst the settlement banks as part of their payments business, while absolutely minimising the Bank s credit risk (by taking high-quality collateral, via intra-day repos). Monthly average of maximum intra-day liquidity posted in CHAPS sterling less maximum intra-day liquidity utilised. An illiquid advance to HM Government. This fluctuated prior to the transfer of responsibility for UK central government cash management to the UK Debt Management Office in April . And, therefore, analogously with overnight standing facilities, the Bank s monetary and financial stability missions also meet in how the RTGS and  OMO  machines fit together. The  OMO  machine has already been described: it provides liquidity at overnight or longer maturities as part of the framework for setting interest rates. The RTGS machine determines how wholesale payments (CHAPS payments) are effected amongst the dozen or so settlement banks. All such transfers are made in real time across the Bank s balance sheet. Where a settlement bank s balance is too small to fund a payment, it borrows from us intra-day   at a zero interest rate and in amounts limited only by how much eligible collateral it has available. In this way, the wholesale payment system is lubricated. There is squaring off at close of business every day. That is to say, if a settlement bank cannot repay its free intra-day borrowing, it is charged a penalty rate on its overdraft, which is the  bridge  to   and forms part of, now and in the future   the monetary-policy machine. In terms of operational mechanisms, the two machines are joined up (settlement banks, collateral etc). In terms of pricing, the intra-day and overnight  markets  are segmented. Up to now the Bank s thinking has been that, so long as there is not a market in intra-day money, we do not need to set the price in order to ensure consistency with monetary policy; and that not rationing the supply of reserves intra-day promotes payment system efficiency. These are issues that we keep under review, but our current reform plans maintain the segmentation. In the new framework, liquidity will, however, be provided in a way that should help to meet the needs of the payments system as well as ensuring that monetary policy is implemented cleanly   essentially by facilitating positive reserve balances at the Bank. As in other countries  systems, it will become possible for the settlement banks to use their (remunerated) cash reserves to make CHAPS-RTGS payments during the day; ie they will be able to fund inter-settlement bank payment transfers by drawing during the day on the pot of cash they hold with the Bank, as well as by drawing on a pot of collateral to borrow from us intra-day. As I ve described, the cash will be provided to the system via OMOs; in aggregate, the banks will still need to borrow reserves from the Bank, but the maturity will be extended from intra-day to that of the OMOs (one week). By contrast, individual RTGS members will have the choice of acquiring their reserves, and so a means of payment, indirectly via the unsecured money market rather than directly via OMOs or intra-day repos with the Bank.  We hope that, taken together, these measures will encourage more banks to join RTGS. In most other industrialised countries, almost all banks are members of the RTGS system. That eliminates intra-day payments-related credit exposures, which regrettably still exist in the UK between the top tier settlement banks and their  correspondent  bank customers and amongst the latter. In terms of financial stability, this is a weakness in the UK s financial architecture, especially where the exposures are, or might in stressed conditions be, large. ###newline###  I suspect that some in the audience will have been bursting with frustration at two of the assumptions that I have maintained throughout this account: that money can be regarded as largely endogenous, and that we need a system that caters only for setting interest rates. But what if interest rates were to hit the zero nominal bound, ie we were in a liquidity trap? At a policy level, the recipe would of course depend on the diagnosis of the problem; and on views about the transmission mechanism and, in particular, the role of money within it. We would, for example, need to form a view   or individual views   on whether the injection of base money was expected to work through affecting the risk-free rate, or risk and liquidity premia on other financial assets, or both. But that lies beyond my scope today. Rather, I want to make two points about the implementation framework. First, as I have described, the Bank s new framework will make provision for the acquisition of longer-term assets (eg government securities) as part and parcel of managing our overall balance sheet in a sensible way, while making sure that the banking system is square. Faced with a liquidity trap, the Bank could in principle make purchases of securities to inject base money, which would be within our vires and technically would be  excess reserves . We would need to do so in a way that preserved the integrity of our balance sheet. The second point is that, in such circumstances, there would potentially be a need to co-ordinate with government debt management, since that by definition also involves the exchange of securities for cash. In a world where OMOs were conceived as an instrument to control the path of reserves, the question of such co-ordination was familiar   as is apparent from Milton Friedman s writings. Most of the time these days, it is not a practical issue. But it is an issue that we have identified, and there is nothing in our planned new framework that would inhibit such questions being explored if they ever needed to be. ###newline###  In designing a new framework for the Bank s official sterling market operations, we have tried to factor in the interactions between the implementation of monetary policy, the lubrication of the wholesale payments system, and the provision of liquidity insurance to the banking system. All are facets of the management of central bank money and the central bank s balance sheet.In summary, we can implement monetary policy because we are a central bank. We are a central bank essentially because we are the bankers  bank. What we have to offer is central bank money. We have tried to take a comprehensive view of how to deploy it. One consequence is that, in various ways, the new regime will alter the operational relationship that the Bank has with the banking system. Our aim is that lots of banks should sign up for the standing facilities, which will require little more than fixing legal agreements etc. We hope that plenty of banks   ie beyond the settlement banks   will choose to join the reserve averaging scheme. Progress on both those fronts will be important to achieve our primary rate-setting objective. We also hope that, having opened reserve accounts with the Bank, more of the large banks will choose to become RTGS settlement banks, which would contribute to the overall safety and soundness of the financial system. But our pre-eminent aim is to stabilise the overnight rate at the MPC s rate, so that the implementation of monetary policy is cleaner and more transparent. Working with the banking industry in the coming period of detailed planning and implementation, we are hopeful of achieving that, and so of having an implementation framework that measures up to the UK s overall monetary regime. ###newline###  Although analytically simple and not addressing more fundamental questions about the Bank s operational architecture, this was a major enterprise. First, the Bank had to  create  a gilt repo market, by getting removed a whole battery of tax and regulatory impediments and by facilitating an industry code to guard against scandals of the types that had accompanied the launch of the US repo market a few years before. (The size of the gilt repo market is now approaching   billion.) Second, the Bank had to oversee the orderly demise of the discount houses and stock-exchange money brokers. Third, changes to the infrastructure were needed. The reforms killed the ability of big banks to dominate the market s holdings of eligible collateral; and, through the deposit and lending facilities, capped volatility (see Chart  in main text). But they were not enough. ###newline###  Operations beyond the maturity of the core  two-week  repo ceased, so that for example outright purchases of bills were confined to bills with a maturity no longer than that of the day s repo; that reduced, but did not eliminate, pivoting. The mechanism of  .pm lending  at Minimum Lending Rate was scrapped. As was a facility for the settlement banks to invite the Bank to buy Treasury Bills up to pm each day, which was replaced by a simpler secured borrowing facility. We got rid of one round of OMOs. We increased transparency by announcing the amounts allotted in rounds of OMOs, and also the details of  late lending . The  tranche system  rationing access to the discount window was abolished. And gilts of all maturities were taken as collateral rather than only gilts of up to five years. But, notwithstanding these steps, the system remained complicated. ###newline###  Objective : Overnight market interest rates to be in line with the MPC s repo rate, so that there is a flat money market yield curve, consistent with the official policy rate, out to the next MPC decision date, with very limited day-to-day or intra-day volatility in market interest rates at maturities out to that horizon. Objective : An efficient, safe and flexible framework for banking system liquidity management   both in competitive money markets and, where appropriate, using central bank money   in routine and stressed or otherwise extraordinary conditions. ###newline###  This annex sets out some of the source materials from the historical parts of the main paper. In his biography of Governor Norman, Henry Clay records that:  In the last resort the Governor could control the supply of money in the Money Market by varying Bank Rate - its price in last resort   and by influencing its amount by sale or purchase of securities  . . Deputy Governor Harvey was called back on Day  of the - Macmillan Committee, on which Keynes sat, for more discussion of monetary policy and its implementation. He made an opening statement (Qu ) which includes the following:  I said when I was here before that I regard it as the principal duty of a Central Bank to maintain the stability of the national monetary unit . If I were asked to state in a few words what the Bank s policy has been, I should say that it has been to maintain a credit position which will afford reasonable assurance of the convertibility of the currency into gold in all circumstances, and, within the limits imposed by that objective, to adjust the price and volume of credit to the requirements of industry and trade. I should say at this stage that we regard the Bank Rate as our principal weapon for carrying that policy into effect . In speaking of the weapons which the Bank uses I purposely omit any reference to control of the volume of credit by means of open market operations; because, after all, such operations are merely part of the machinery by which the weapon of the Bank Rate is made efficient.  Nearly thirty years later, in his oral evidence to the Radcliffe Committee, Chief Cashier O Brien presented a similar and a rather clear picture of the system:  If the discount houses having been to all the banks and found out what they are doing, whether calling cash or lending cash, have finally come to the conclusion that the supply of cash on that day is not going to be sufficient to enable them to carry their books of Treasury bills and short bonds, they can come to us and we can repair the shortage in one of two ways. The Chief Cashier can buy bills from the market at the market rate. There is no pain to the discount houses; they merely exchange part of their bill portfolio at the going market price for cash. That puts them square. If we are not disposed to help them in that painless way then they have to come round to the Discount Office, and nowadays borrow at Bank Rate on the security of market Treasury Bills or short bonds.   Professor Cairncross:  where you are acting as lender of last resort, you are lending at Bank Rate?   Acting as lender of last resort, it is at Bank Rate. The other method, of buying in bills is not lending: it is putting out cash in exchange for securities.  Other of O Brien s replies seem to imply clearly that the operating target was an interest rate, rather than a quantity. Moreover, they do not imply that OMOs were directly setting the market rate, but rather that OMOs were used to adjust the quantities so as to control the volume of borrowing at Bank Rate.  If we wanted to raise interest rates, then we would give less help or possibly no help at all, and we would say:  If you want cash you must come to the Discount Office for it . And moreover we could if need be so arrange that the market needed a great deal of cash; the influence can be graded almost infinitely.  Assistant Director Coleby s  paper on operational procedures for meeting monetary objectives brings out the continuity in the Bank s operational framework until the early-s reforms:  Until recently and despite variations and appearances to the contrary, the operational technique for giving effect to official interest rate objectives has stayed close to the classical model. That involved the setting, and periodic variation, of an official discount or lending rate, which, when necessary, is  made effective  by open market operations in the money market.  Making Bank rate effective  means restraining a decline in market rates from an unchanged Bank rate, or bringing them up to a newly established and higher Bank rate; it is accomplished by limiting the availability of cash to the banking system so as to  force the market into the Bank  to borrow at the somewhat penal rate of Bank rate.  five times before it was replaced by an explicitly administered MLR in . Setting a very short lending rate by reference to a market -month rate had proved uncomfortable.  The normal conduct of the Bank s money-market operations was therefore envisaged as a market-clearing exercise. The Bank would accept as many of the offers or bids as was necessary to square the market, starting with the best rates and arriving at the  stop rate  which just cleared the market, the result of the operation, including the range of rates at which the dealings had taken place, being immediately made public. Provision was made to override the normal arrangements if they should produce a stop rate which was unacceptable to the authorities, by lying outside an  unpublished band  which defined the range of short-term interest rates currently judged to be consistent with policy objectives. If the stop rate was too high, more cash would be put into the system so as to arrive at an acceptably lower one: if too low, the system would be left short of cash so as to drive rates up.  The system was clearly designed with variable-rate OMOs in mind. But with no continuously posted official rates to offer a focus to the market, the  stop rates  accepted in the OMOs acquired great significance:  every downward movement, even as small as / per cent, came to be seen as a signal of official intent, not as a passive or incidental response to market fluctuations . the mechanics of the operations on other days remained basically unchanged. In particular, the form was still that in its OMOs, the Bank was responding to rate offers from its counterparties, with the consequence that it was sometimes frustrated in its attempts to implement a change in rates desired by the authorities. One consequence of OMOs taking centre stage was that it fostered a perception that the maturity of rates being set (or targeted) for policy purposes was the same as the maturity of the OMOs. So, for example, the Bank said:   if official operations could be confined to the shortest paper   maturities of, say, not longer than one month   it would enable the market to become the dominant influence on the shape of the yield curve for longer money-market maturities without requiring either lead or validation from the authorities . The clear implication was that conducting OMOs at a particular maturity entailed an element of setting or validating rates at that maturity. In the event, the Bank was not able to restrict its OMOs to short maturities. For a variety of technical reasons, the scale of the banking system s structural shortage and so of the Bank s OMOs increased a lot during the early s. But, until the s, the Bank s daily OMOs were conducted via purchases of commercial bills and Treausry bills, and in consequence there was not enough eligible paper for the Bank to recycle liquidity at short maturities. The result was that the Bank occasionally bought bills with maturities out to three months. From time to time, that fostered perceptions that the Bank was giving signals about official policy intentions. always stands ready to deal daily in its operations, this mid-point for short-term rates is reinforced frequently .So there is no need for a formal band or corridor  . In other words, the Bank had slipped into thinking of OMOs as the instrument through which we implemented policy.  In addition, we may also in some conditions need to leave some of the daily shortage to be relieved at the end of the day via late lending so as to ensure that the Bank is   and is known to be   the marginal supplier of system liquidity throughout the day, preventing large banks from substituting themselves as the marginal player(s). The known availability of late lending at a known rate should also help to put a cap on the upward volatility of very short rates.  But such discretion has not been used, in order to avoid any risk of the Bank being perceived to give signals via its operations about the MPC s rate intentions.