 The main reason for believing that the UK economy might be behaving differently is that economic forecasters have, on average, significantly under-predicted GDP growth while simultaneously over-predicting inflation since . One plausible explanation for this phenomenon is that some of the underlying structural relationships have changed. ###newline###  The improvement in the growth-inflation trade-off might have occurred because globalisation, deregulation and, more recently, internet price comparisons might have increased perceived competitive pressure. Survey evidence is supportive of the notion that the degree of product market competition has intensified, and I report on preliminary econometric work which suggests that inflation forecasts in the s would have been more accurate if they had incorporated such survey responses. This provides some support for the view embodied in the MPC s central projection that a continuing intensification of competitive pressure is likely to depress inflation over the next two years. ###newline###  Changes in the unemployment benefits regime and union power have also probably contributed to the improvement in the growth-inflation trade-off in the UK during the last decade. ###newline###  It is possible that measurement issues have led forecasters to under-estimate the supply potential of the UK economy. For example, a preliminary set of estimates of the flow of capital services to industry has shown twice the growth that has been seen in a conventional measure of change in net capital stock derived from official estimates of wealth. The use of the capital services measure could give a  significantly higher growth rate of potential output. To take another example, if one makes alternative assumptions about the classification of software spending and also substituted US-style price indices for computers and software, then, preliminary, illustrative calculations suggest that GDP growth might have been underestimated by as much as . percentage points per annum over the period -. Importantly, the size of the potential bias in the estimate of GDP growth has been growing over time, which is likely to lead to biases in estimates of indicators of inflationary pressure like the output gap. The ONS is working closely with the Bank to continue progress in the area of capital stock measures, and the issue of quality adjustment of computer prices was addressed in the recent Quality Review of Short Term Indicators of Output released by the ONS. ###newline###  Personally, I believe that it is likely that productivity growth is likely to be above average over the next  years, primarily because of the likely response of firms to intensified product market competition, the beneficial effects of BB e-commerce, and the fact that the payoff from the significant amount of Information and Communications Technology investment that has occurred is due soon. To  wait and see  for a statistically significant change in the actual, measured productivity growth might be to miss an economically significant change in the true productivity growth rate. ###newline###  Although it is easy to be excited by the structural changes that are happening, it is important to emphasise that while the  New Economy  considerations discussed above have important disinflationary effects, they do not imply the death of inflation. It therefore remains important to continue to monitor a variety of wholly conventional influences on inflation when setting policy. It is, for example, important that the recent rise in oil prices does not lead to an increase in inflation expectations. ###newline###  A more appropriate characterisation of how a central banker might define the NE is, perhaps, that provided by Chairman Greenspan. ###newline###  I shall, therefore, turn to a discussion of what might be different about how the UK economy operates now, as compared to, say, how it behaved in the seventies or eighties. ###newline###  One reason for thinking that the UK economy might be behaving differently is to look at the evidence suggesting that economic forecasters have been persistently too gloomy about the UK economy since the departure from the ERM. GDP growth has been underestimated by about .% pa, which is a large error in relation to the actual average growth rate of around .%. ###newline###  A commonly cited reason for why the economy might be behaving differently is that the degree of product market competition has intensified over the last few years. A contributory factor may be globalisation, ie the increasing integration of global product markets. (Figure  suggests a striking increase in the degree of import penetration in the UK, with the rate of increase having accelerated in recent years). ###newline###  Evidence of increased product market competition has not just been confined to globalisation. Government action has also played a role here. Privatisation and/or regulatory changes in a whole host of industries including gas, water, telecom, electricity, airports, rail, the docks and broadcasting have led to rather more competitive product market conditions. Of course, the intensification of competition does not appear to have been confined just to the internationally traded or deregulated sectors   in a conjunctural context we continue to hear much about the  price wars  in retailing as well. Figure  shows that, within the retailing sector, the CBI Distributive Trades Survey suggests that the perceived ability to increase prices, at a given level of demand, is lower than it used to be. Notice that while reported volumes recovered after their Autumn  slowing, pressure on pricing has continued to intensify. Currently, the response to the price question is at a record low even though the survey balance for volumes is above average. It appears that, in a low and stable inflation environment, consumers have become more discriminating buyers, as they are better able to distinguish between relative and absolute changes. More recently, foreign entrants into the UK retail market, internet price comparisons and investigations into allegedly uncompetitive practices might have played some role. ###newline###  A crude proxy for the extent of perceived competitive pressure is to rely on survey evidence. The Euler Trade Industry Indemnity survey (which spans all the broad industry sectors) has asked questions relating to the extent to which price discounting and the competitive environment have been perceived as impacting on profitability since . Figure  displays the responses. Note that a response below  suggests that the factor is having a negative impact on profitability. The responses appear to point to an intensification of perceived competitive pressures and the extent of discounting over this period, (dating back to around mid-), as they have fallen further below , suggesting a greater negative impact on profitability. ###newline###  It is sometimes asserted that an intensification of competition is a one-off event and must, therefore, only have a transient effect on inflation. Consequently, the argument goes, it should not affect one s perception of the medium-term outlook for inflation. As my ex-colleague, Willem Buiter () has recently emphasised again, inflation is, ultimately, a monetary phenomenon. A fall in the NAIRU that was associated with intensified product market competition would not, therefore, reduce inflation in the long-run, though there would be important short-run effects. Specifically, suppose that we start in a position where inflation is running at  % and would, on unchanged interest rates, remain constant thereafter. Now, assume that the NAIRU falls because of intensified product market competition, then, other things being equal, inflation out-turns will start coming in below target. A central bank that, like the Bank of England (BoE hereafter), has a symmetric inflation target will respond to the expected below target inflation by lowering interest rates. However, over time, the actual unemployment rate should drift down to the new, lower level of the NAIRU. When that happens one would expect interest rates and inflation to rise back to their original level. Hence, in the short-run, the benign structural factors should enable inflation to come in lower than before. I should say that the  short-run  in this example could, in practice, last several years, as structural factors that lower the NAIRU can, sometimes improve gradually over a number of years. Indeed, Figure  suggests that, until now, the perceived intensification of competitive pressure has been a relatively long-lasting phenomenon (has already gone on for over  years), and could, therefore, have legitimately been taken into account by policymakers. ###newline###  Regression run is Actual RPIX out-turns on a constant term, the relevant forecast (four quarters ago), and the Euler survey response (four quarters ago). There is also some direct support for the notion of a change in the underlying structural relationship linking retail goods prices to its underlying  determinants. Some preliminary econometric work at the External MPC unit at the Bank of England has found that a conventional equation  which could explain the behaviour of retail goods prices reasonably well until early , has broken down since with actual outturns significantly lower than fitted values. Of course, as with any econometric exercise, alternative explanations might be offered, but the hypothesis of a structural change in margins is quite compelling as it accords with anecdotal and survey evidence. If one were, however, sceptical of the view that an intensification of product market competition has been an important factor, one might point to the fact that the profit share of nominal GDP for the UK is around its post- average (see Figure ), which does not, at first sight, point to a significant squeeze in margins. Although the profit share has fallen back in recent years (which would be consistent with a compression of margins), the level of the profit share is broadly unchanged since , which is around when the trade-off between inflation and GDP growth appears to have altered. Moreover, the profit-share of GDP in the US is also, if anything, slightly above its post- average (see Figure ). ###newline###  However, it is important to recognise that an intensification of competitive pressure would only be associated with an actual fall of observed profit margins if everything else remains unchanged. Specifically, if, for example there was a technology-driven rise in productivity growth, and the real wages of workers did not initially rise in line with the increase in productivity (which is an historical regularity), then, we might nevertheless observe a rise in the profit share. This may help explain why the profit share in the US has not fallen in the s. Alternatively, if the power of labour were diminishing (say, because of a fall in union power), then, this would, of itself, be associated with a rise in the profit share. Of course, a simultaneous intensification of product market competition would put downward pressure on the profit share. As to what happens to the actual observed profit margin depends on which of these two factors predominates. As I shall remind you below, there is much that has happened in the UK labour market to strengthen the relative bargaining position of firms vis- -vis workers. Consequently, I am quite content to believe than an intensification of competitive pressure has occurred even though the profit share has been broadly stable. ###newline###  I have previously discussed the far-reaching changes that have occurred in the UK labour market over the last two decades (see Wadhwani (a)), so I will not have much to say on that topic today. However, Table  reminds us that, along a variety of dimensions, a great deal is different today (cf.  vs ).  Union membership  and strike activity are much lower. Imbalances in the pattern of labour demand and supply have diminished significantly. Turning to the unemployment benefits regime, the conventional replacement ratio (ie the ratio of out-of-work benefit to estimated in- work income) has fallen. Further, the New Deal, and other measures which have tightened the availability of benefits have also probably been influential. It is notable that if one takes the wage equation that is to be found in the Bank of England s core macro-econometric model (see Bank of England ()), then, there is evidence that it has over-predicted wage growth in recent years (ie since around ). ###newline###  *Annual (absolute) change in the ratio of employee jobs in the production and construction industries to total employee jobs. ** Ratio of manufacturing firms reporting skilled labour shortages to those reporting shortages of other labour (source: CBI Industrial Trends Survey). It is sometimes pointed that while many of the labour market variables that are supposed to underlie the NAIRU changed during the - period, much of the evidence for a lower NAIRU appears to post-date . Hence, some argue that the changes in the labour market cannot be the explanation for the change in the NAIRU. On the other hand, industrial relations experts like Professor William Brown of Cambridge argue that the structural improvements in the labour market during the - period did not translate into improved wage performance until other catalytic events induced firms to undertake radical industrial relations change in the early s. Possible candidates as catalysts are the - recession, and the re-election of the government in , which implied that many of the structural changes in the labour market were not going to be reversed. There is case-study evidence in favour of both these factors having played some role (see eg Brown et al ()). Other possible catalytic events include the adoption of an explicit inflation target after . Personally, I have no problem with the notion that structural changes can take time before they manifest themselves in improved macroeconomic performance. Any changes to the way labour is used (eg reforming pay systems, improving selection, etc) requires managerial effort, and takes time to get in place and be effective. Of course, it is plausible that some of the improvement in the wage-unemployment trade-off during the late s is attributable to lower import prices   caused by a combination of an appreciation of sterling, weak commodity prices during the - Asian crisis and possible supply-side improvements in other countries. Note though that the trade-off appeared to improve after the UK left the ERM in  even though a fall in sterling boosted import prices. Looking over the last decade, it is reasonable to believe that the NAIRU has fallen because of, both, labour market improvements and the intensification of product market competition, some of which may have been associated with changes in regulation. Moreover, it is possible that recent outcomes (-) have been somewhat flattered by lower real import prices during -. Looking ahead, the higher real import prices over the past year (mainly due to higher oil prices) should worsen the apparent short-run trade-off, but the likely intensification of product market competition (through the internet, etc) should continue to help reduce the NAIRU over the next few years. Obviously, this is a complex affair, and I am not surprised that Chairman Greenspan was recently quoted as saying: ###newline###  It will, therefore, remain especially important to closely monitor actual developments as we attempt to form the difficult judgements in this area. Recall that the intensification of product market competition has already gone on for several years. At some point, this process will come to an end. It will be important for us to be vigilant to signs that this might be happening. I have, so far, discussed how structural changes in the economy make an assessment of the conjuncture and the preparation of our inflation forecast a rather tricky matter. However, our problems are compounded by the existence of measurement error, an issue to which I turn next. ###newline###  It is inevitable that the economic aggregates that we are interested in will be measured with error. If the size of the bias caused by measurement error varies significantly over time, this can make it especially difficult to set policy appropriately. I shall discuss a couple of illustrative examples below. ###newline###  We discussed above the use of the NAIRU in policy-setting. A closely related  concept is that of the  output gap , which is the difference between actual  and potential output. Of course, the level of potential output is rather difficult to measure. ###newline###  Researchers at the US Federal Reserve System (see Orphanides and Norden ()) have shown that: ###newline###  At the Bank, one of our methods of computing the supply potential of the economy relies on summing the weighted growth rates of employment, the capital stock and technical progress. Among other things, it is obviously rather important to use a measure of the capital stock which reflects its productive potential when performing this calculation.The different methods of obtaining a measure of the capital stock can yield rather different results. For example, current ONS estimates of the capital stock are a so-called  wealth type measure , where each item is weighted by its current asset price. While this is a valid measure for balance sheet purposes, it will be less appropriate for an assessment of productive potential, where one might want to compute an index of the volume of capital services (IVCS hereafter) instead. Note that in the IVCS, each item of capital is, in principle, weighted by its contribution to output (ie its marginal revenue product) rather than its asset price.  A consequence of using the IVCS instead is that  it increases the weight accorded to shorter-lived assets such as machinery, equipment and software relative to buildings. If the stocks of shorter-lived assets (eg computers) are growing more rapidly than other types, then the IVCS will, in turn, grow more rapidly than the wealth-based measure. Nicholas Oulton of the Bank of England has computed a preliminary measure of the IVCS, which may, for purely illustrative purposes, be compared to the wealth-based aggregate (see Figure ). Notice that while, on the wealth-based measure, the growth rate over the last two decades is broadly constant, the IVCS grew faster over - (.% pa) vs -  (.% pa). If one concentrates on the post- period, then, the wealth-based measure has grown at around % pa, while the IVCS measure has grown at around twice that rate (approximately % pa). Of course, this can make a significant difference to any estimate of the growth rate of potential output. For example, if one makes the extreme assumption that one s estimate of total factor productivity (TPF) growth is unaffected, then the alternative estimate of the growth rate of the capital stock would imply an increase in the growth rate of potential output of as much as .% p.a. which in relation to conventional estimates of a growth rate of potential output in the %-  % p.a. area is a rather large difference. Note, though, that as a matter of arithmetic, if the productive capital stock has indeed grown faster in recent years, then measured TFP growth must have been slower, which might lead one to lower the assumption about the trend growth rate of TFP.  This  would correspondingly lower the degree to which correct estimates of the growth rate of potential output might be understated. Alternatively, the lowering of the measured growth rate of TFP might lead one to question the plausibility of the GDP estimates. Hence, the precise impact of the understatement of the growth rate of the productive capital stock on the growth rate of potential output is necessarily uncertain, though the direction of the bias is clear. Fortunately, the Bank and the ONS are currently cooperating on a project on the IVCS, and we await the results with great interest. ###newline###  With the growing consensus that the growth of investment in information and communications technology (ICT hereafter) has contributed to an upsurge in productivity growth in the US, there is obvious interest in investigating the role of ICT and productivity growth in the UK. I have initiated some work on this issue at  the Bank, though, as yet, I can only share with you some rather preliminary results. Nicholas Oulton has started the project by applying US methods for measuring ICT. He has used US price indices for computers and software, because they incorporate a substantial amount of research into adjustment for quality change. Because ICT products are extensively traded internationally, it is plausible that the rate at which quality adjusted prices are falling should be much the same in all countries (after adjustment for exchange rate changes). However it should be noted that the measurement of price indices for computers is conceptually very challenging due to the rate of technological change and no single approach of quality adjustment is without its drawbacks. Table  compares the price indices used by both countries in their national accounts. In computers and software, the UK price index was growing much faster than its US counterpart in -. In computers, this gap narrowed in the early s, but then widened substantially in the latest period, -. In software, the gap narrowed in - while still remaining substantial. In telecommunications, by contrast, the gap was in the other direction over -. Since then, it has been small by comparison with other components. ###newline###  Uses adjusted version of official US software price indices. For the UK, software investment is deflated by the overall implicit deflator for machinery and equipment. Obviously, if inflation in computers and software is overstated in the UK, then real growth has been understated, since it is money values that are measured directly. Using US-style price indices should lead to higher estimates of ICT investment, GDP growth and productivity growth for the UK (as we discuss below). In the recently released National Statistics Quality Review report, there are some calculations which suggest that using US price indices for the computer industry (but not changing the assumptions regarding software), the level of industrial production in  Q would have been about % higher, with much of the gap being established in the post- period. There are those who believe that the hedonic price indices used by the US actually somewhat understate inflation, and this is clearly a controversial area. However, on the basis that it is important to be aware of the quantitative importance of alternative assumptions about price indices in the ICT sectors, I shall discuss some preliminary illustrative estimates of the potential biases in estimated GDP growth below. Note that there are other important differences between ICT measurement practices in the US and the UK which might also have the effect of overstating the amount of ICT investment in the US versus the UK. For example, although the growth rate of software investment (measured in current prices) is very similar in the US and the UK, there is a large discrepancy in the levels. Specifically, in the US, software investment has averaged % of computer investment, while, by contrast, the corresponding ratio was only % in the UK. Since people buy computers to run software, it seems very unlikely that there should be such a large discrepancy between the UK and the US. This striking difference in the estimated levels of software investment might arise because of differences in the interpretation of what is investment, and what is intermediate consumption in computer services   in the US, about three-fifths of the total products of the computer services industry is classified in investment   in the UK, the corresponding proportion is less than one-fifth. Therefore, Oulton suggests, for illustrative purposes, that it might be appropriate to inflate the UK figure for software investment by a factor of , which is at the lower end of the possible range of grossing-up factors considered by him. Of course, this is an extremely difficult area, and because of the paucity of reliable information, what might seem a conservative assumption to someone, might appear to be too high to another. However, as a policymaker, it is important to be aware of the full range of possibilities, and it is in that spirit that I look at alternative illustrative computations of ICT investment. In particular, on the official numbers, the UK lags the US considerably in terms of ICT investment as a percentage of GDP (see Figure A). By contrast, on Oulton s estimates, the UK stacks up rather well vis- -vis the US (see Figure B). Table  shows the impact of adjusting for the aforementioned biases on estimates of GDP growth on Oulton s assumptions. Notice that  the potential bias is substantial  (up to .pp pa by -) and moreover, has been rising over time (only .-. pp pa during -). If GDP growth has truly been .% pa faster than we currently believe, then this affects one s estimates of productivity growth, which, in turn, might affect our assessment of domestically generated inflationary pressure. Note that if the growth rate of actual and potential output were higher than we thought by the same amount, but this amount remained constant over time, then our estimates of the output gap would be unaffected by this measurement error. However, if the size of the understatement of actual output growth is rising over time (on these numbers, it accelerated in - by .% compared to -), but estimates of the potential growth rate are, in part, backward looking, then contemporaneous measures of the output gap are likely to end up underestimating the degree of slack in the economy. Also, there are, of course, other indicators of inflationary pressure that we monitor which would be affected by an understatement of productivity growth. For example, measures of unit labour cost growth would obviously be overstated were productivity growth understated. ###newline###  Of course, Oulton s preliminary estimates are predicated on his assumptions and are designed to be purely illustrative. It is possible that further work (with the active and essential cooperation of the ONS) might lead to different point estimates of the size of the biases in GDP growth. However, the direction of the bias in GDP estimates and the direction in which the bias is moving seem relatively uncontroversial and as policymakers, it is important for us to be aware of them. Having discussed some examples of the problems caused to us by measurement difficulties, I now turn to consider the issue of attempting to forecast likely productivity growth, a rather important component of any inflation forecast. ###newline###  Currently, our best collective projection builds in the assumption that labour productivity growth will not materially differ from its -year average of around % pa. Of course, this is in sharp contrast to the US, where, in recent years, forecasts of productivity growth have been increased significantly (by, at least, .pp pa). Given that it is accepted that ICT advances have played a significant role in recent US productivity experience (see, eg Oliner and Sichel () or Jorgensen and Stiroh ()), and given the significant amount of ICT investment that has been undertaken in the UK (the numbers discussed above suggested that, as a fraction of GDP, the UK might even have invested as much as the US), it is rather puzzling that the UK does not appear to have experienced any significant upsurge in terms of measured productivity growth. I discussed above the ICT-related biases in the measurement of GDP growth, with the preliminary illustrative calculations suggesting a recent understatement of labour productivity growth of perhaps around .pp pa. However, if this were the only source of bias in the measurement of productivity growth, this would, by itself, not change the fact that labour productivity growth in - was below its average level. Of course, there may be other reasons for believing that productivity growth has been understated during the late s. I have previously discussed this issue at some length (see Wadhwani (b)), so I shall be brief here, but I would point to   Official data suggests that manufacturing productivity growth was zero during -, while survey responses from the CBI Pay Databank sample suggested productivity growth averaged around % pa over this period. No-one has satisfactorily explained why the measured deceleration in manufacturing productivity growth appeared to coincide with a rise in profitability (over the - period). Of course, more research is needed, but, as a policymaker, it is important to be alive to the possibility that measured productivity growth numbers significantly understate actual growth. Even if there were no reasons for believing that historical, measured productivity growth has been understated, one might believe that productivity growth might be set to rise in coming years. Another possible explanation for the fact that UK productivity growth has not risen despite significant ICT investment is that there are time-lags associated with learning how to use the technology appropriately. Note that US productivity growth did not rise until after  despite many years of significant ICT-related  investment.  Hence, it is possible that productivity growth in the UK might be about to rise. I do draw some encouragement from some empirical work reported in Bean (), where he reports a significant link between average TFP growth and the share of ICT investment in GDP for a cross-section of OECD economies. The economic impact of ICT investment is estimated to be large, implying roughly a point-for-point response of TFP growth to an increase in the share of GDP spent on ICT investment. Yet another possibility is that the likely growth in the ICT sector in the UK (note that productivity growth in the ICT sector itself has been a significant contributor to US productivity growth) and the effects of the internet-related BB commerce could lead to a significant rise in productivity growth. In a special survey conducted for the Monetary Policy Committee during May , the Bank s Agents found that UK companies expect a significant increase in BB e- commerce over the next  years. Figure  shows that while the vast majority of businesses do not engage in BB e-commerce now, over two-thirds expect to purchase over the internet within two years. ###newline###  However, in terms of assessing the likely effects of the internet on productivity growth over the next few years (which is primarily what central bankers care about),  it is important to assess the likely speed of diffusion of an invention alongside the intrinsic merit of an invention. On this criterion, the internet scores rather well  relative to previous inventions. As The Economist () points out, electricity achieved a % share of the power used by America s manufacturing industry  years after the discovery of electromagnetic induction, and  years after the first power station was built. By contrast, the internet is approaching % penetration in America  years after it was invented and only seven years since it was launched commercially in . Of course, the Agents  survey that I discussed earlier also pointed to a quick take-up of BB e-commerce. In the UK, % of adults had used  the internet by July . Amongst these people, as many as % had already used it for buying or ordering tickets/goods/services, while % did so for finding information about goods or services. Kneller and Young () point out that the s have seen strong productivity growth in the Business Services sector, an area which is ICT-intensive. Perhaps this is indicative of what might occur as ICT diffuses more widely through the economy. An additional reason for believing that productivity growth might rise is the intensification of product market competition that was discussed in Section  above. In standard bargaining models, one would expect this to lead to a reduction in the degree of X-inefficiency. I must say that there is much anecdotal evidence that this might be happening. In the light of the above, some members of the MPC (including myself) have been prepared to assume that, at least over the next two years, labour productivity growth is likely to be above average. It is possible to argue that we should  wait and see  until there is a statistically significant  increase  in  observed productivity growth.However, when I was a student, some of my teachers often emphasised the distinction between an  economically significant difference  and a  statistically significant difference . Actual productivity growth is notoriously volatile   waiting for a statistically significant increase in productivity growth could lead to inappropriate policy. For example, Table  shows some estimates of TFP growth in the UK for the post-war period.   Note that  estimated TFP growth slowed down by . pp per year over a    year period after the so-called  Golden Age  of -. A difference of .pp is economically significant for any assessment of underlying inflationary pressure (eg measuring unit labour costs). Yet, a formal statistical test (a t-statistic) would not reject the hypothesis that the means of TFP growth are equal. A monetary policymaker who waited for a statistically significant change in TFP growth would almost certainly have left interest rates too low in this case. Of course, it would remain important to be vigilant to the possibility that what seemed like an economically significant difference in productivity growth was not an entirely transient phenomenon, but that is why monitoring a host of indicators is so important. ###newline###  In discussing the challenges posed for monetary policy by the  new economy , I  have, so far, concentrated exclusively on the supply-side effects. Therefore, I now turn to a brief consideration of the demand-side effects. ###newline###  As Chairman Greenspan and others have argued, it is possible that an expected rise in productivity growth leads to a rise in aggregate demand before one gets a corresponding rise in aggregate supply. This is because, say, share prices rise in line with the higher expected productivity growth before there is any necessary improvement in supply-side performance. Higher share prices, in turn, are assumed  to boost consumption expenditure now. The existence of such a wealth effect on consumption is relatively uncontroversial, and the MPC has indeed allowed higher share prices to boost its most likely forecast for consumption. Note that it is difficult to make sense of the current level of global equity prices unless productivity  growth  is  expected  to  be  rather  higher  than  in  the past. In this situation, it seems to me that a forecaster should choose between two logically consistent possibilities.The forecaster might assume that productivity growth is going to be higher and then build this assumption into, both, the demand side (through higher share prices)  and the supply-side.Alternatively, if the forecaster is a  new economy  sceptic, he/she should assume that share prices will actually fall when the markets realise that productivity growth is not going to rise, and should therefore build in lower aggregate demand.Personally, I am, therefore, a little uncomfortable with the MPC s best collective  most likely  projection, which builds in the demand- side effects of a rise in productivity through higher share prices, but makes no corresponding adjustment to the supply-side for productivity effects. ###newline###  There is much that is exciting about the internet and it is sometimes difficult to resist being swept along by some of the hype that surrounds it. Although I have argued above that the  New Economy  (defined in the broad sense of changes in underlying structural relationships) has already had a significant impact, it remains important to keep one s feet firmly planted on the ground. Turning to the current conjuncture in the UK, it is obviously gratifying that we appear to be able to continue to combine relatively steady growth with low and stable inflation. A concern that some of us have is that the exchange rate remains  overvalued (vis- -vis the euro). It is possible that a sharp downward adjustment  in the exchange rate could have a large impact on measured inflation in the first  instance. wage settlements should rise because headline inflation (RPI) is currently rather higher than RPIX (% vs .%).It strikes me that a tendency for wages to follow past headline inflation was perhaps true of a world where firms had considerable product  market  power and inflation itself was  not mean-reverting.Currently, we have a central bank that is mandated to maintain inflation at .% at all times and intense product market competition.It is therefore less likely that wage settlements will rise significantly with headline inflation, but we must remain vigilant to this risk. Another short-term risk to the benign inflation picture is the significant rise in the oil price. While the MPC has accommodated the first-round impact effect on inflation, we shall continue to look out for any evidence of second-round effects on wages, which must clearly be resisted. Once again, intense product market competition is likely to stiffen the resolve of employers, who can be expected to resist oil-related wage increases, but it remains important for us to be vigilant to this risk. Inflation expectations must not be allowed to rise. As discussed earlier, one is necessarily uncertain about the relative contribution of low import  prices and structural changes to the improvement in the growth-inflation tradeoff. With import prices now having risen, we shall  learn  more about this in forthcoming months. Therefore, monitoring indicators of building wage or price pressures will be unusually important. It is important to remind ourselves that, historically, misplaced hopes of a supply-side improvement have led to poor policy decisions.  More generally, it is important to emphasise that although the  New Economy  considerations discussed above have important disinflationary effects, they do not imply the death of inflation. It therefore remains important to continue to monitor a variety of wholly conventional influences on inflation when setting policy.