 I would like to thank Jochen Schanz and Gilberto Marcheggiano for help in preparing this talk. There is a great temptation to believe that the times we live in are extraordinary. By definition that is generally not true. But I think it is true today when we think about what is happening in the economy. Towards the end of  we had a financial crisis that took the UK (and other countries) close to a position where the banking sector stopped functioning   an event, had it happened, that would have been about as severe as a prolonged failure of all energy supply. For the UK, this was probably the most serious banking crisis in its history. In the aftermath of that crisis there was a period when output, and confidence, fell on a scale that was as serious as during the first stage of what we now call the Great Depression (see Figure ). In the first months of  world trade fell at a pace that one associates with the start of a world war. Between the middle of  and the Spring of  world commodity prices roughly halved. Since then   that is since the period when the world (and not just countries whose banking systems were most damaged) seemed likely to be descending into a global slump   we have seen many commodity prices (in sterling) nearly double (Figure ). We have also seen fiscal deficits rise to levels unprecedented in peacetime.  For the UK the Office for Budget Responsibility estimates that between - and - the stock of public sector net debt will have roughly doubled as a percent of GDP   from around % to close to %. If we include that debt, and take account of the debt of the banks now classified to the public sector, the picture is even more remarkable (Figure ). One aspect of how extraordinary this period is   how unlike a textbook economic cycle it is where a period of well under trend growth is followed by a period of above trend growth   is illustrated by Figure  which shows the evolution of the level of GDP since  and an assessment made by the MPC of the chances of the level of GDP following different paths over the next three years. The level of GDP now   in early    is about % below where one would have expected it to be had the UK experienced average (by its own past standards) growth from the start of . I think a reasonable view is that growth over the next three years is about as likely to be above as below the long run average rate. That is pretty much what is implied by the projection shown in Figure  where the average outcome   based on an assessment of the risks around a central path   is that growth is close to the long run trend.  This is not a pessimistic forecast relative to judgements currently being made by other forecasters. If that is how things evolve   and of course the overwhelming chances are that it will be either worse or better than that   it So what is unusual about the recent very sharp recession is both its depth and the probable absence of a subsequent period of consistently above trend growth. This is a very sobering picture; some might call it bleak. Anyway what it is clearly not is a standard text-book cycle when the lost output in the downswing is offset by what happens in the upswing. And Figure  suggests that by the standards of the big recessions of the twentieth century   and not just relative to average ups-and-downs of textbook economic cycles   we are seeing something unusually severe. This is one aspect of how serious the crisis and its aftermath have been. Self evidently not all parts of the world have been affected like this; though when things were at their worst at the end of  and in the first part of  that was not so clear. Since then those parts of the world where banking systems were less damaged, and/or mattered less to the economy, have seen a strong rebound. Growth in emerging economies has been fast   close to % in    and is expected to continue at a similar pace during . That is a major factor behind the roller coaster ride of commodity prices. I think the best explanation behind the extraordinary decline in commodity prices between the middle of  and the Spring of    when the prices of many commodities halved   is that it appeared at that time that a financial crisis would cause a global depression from which it would be hard to exit. Since then, many commodity prices have roughly doubled. There has been an almost complete recovery in the level of economic activity in the fast-growing parts of the world. These are parts of the world which have the greatest intensity of demand for commodities. They are back on the steeply rising trajectory they were on before it seemed the world economy was collapsing. It is no accident that most commodity prices are also   roughly   back to where they were in mid-. Where does the UK stand amidst all this? Not in a great place. We have a large banking sector   which is one reason why the downturn was very sharp, the hit to confidence severe and there has been little or no recovery of the lost activity. We are also highly reliant on imported commodities   whose recent dramatic rise in price has reflected recovery in parts of the world where the financial crisis does not seem to have done any lasting harm. The UK also now has a very large fiscal deficit, and has had a substantial and long lasting current account deficit which reflected low public and household sector saving rates rather than unusually strong investment. We also have a current rate of inflation of around %. This is   as the old joke goes   not a nice place to start from. Re-balancing of the economy requires a tightening in fiscal policy, a rise in exports relative to imports, almost certainly a higher saving rate from households and more investment. We need that re-balancing to happen while confidence is fragile, unemployment has gone up significantly and inflation has moved substantially above the % target level. The forces that will bring about re-balancing are already at work. Following the very large depreciation in sterling of - the exchange rate is at a much more competitive level; fiscal policy is being tightened. But the factors that will bring about re-balancing also generate short term inflation pressures: the rise in the rate of VAT and the fall in the exchange rate mean   all else equal   higher inflation pressures for a period. Factor in the impact of the huge rises in commodity prices over the past year (in excess of %) and you would anticipate a serious inflation problem. And we do have an inflation problem. Inflation on the CPI measure over the year to February is at %   double the % target. As an MPC member I find it deeply worrying that this should be so. More importantly, for the typical UK household   whose income might be rising at a rate that is barely at %   a rate of inflation of around % means a significant fall in the standard of living. But for a moment I want to step back and ask a simple question about inflation: Why isn t it higher? Estimates from the Bank s latest Inflation Report suggest that if shocks from changes in VAT, energy prices, and import prices had hit us in normal circumstances, inflation might well have climbed to % or % over the past year. Figure  is from that Inflation Report. It shows a range for the estimated impact of these factors on CPI inflation over the past year. That range has stretched as high as % and is now between % and %. This is an estimate of how much higher than normal inflation is because of tax rises and increases in the cost of imported materials and goods. So if, in their absence, we would have see inflation at about the % target level then what Figure  suggests is that the import price rises and VAT might have been expected to generate a path for inflation over the past year that was between % and %. The average over the past year might have been around % or %. Actual inflation has not been that high. So it looks like some other factors have been working in the opposite direction. The lower band (in green) in Figure  illustrates that.  It is an estimate of CPI inflation excluding the impact of the rise in VAT, of commodity prices and of rises in other imported goods. That rate of inflation looks like it would have been close to zero   considerably below the % one might have expected under normal economic conditions. There is a legitimate question as to whether it makes sense to look at the impact of tax changes, shifts in commodity prices and movements in the exchange rate upon prices and estimate what inflation might have looked like without those factors. If those things themselves reflected actual and expected monetary policy   and in particular the expectation of very expansionary monetary policy   then it would not be sensible to calculate what inflation might have been in their absence, but with monetary policy held where it was. For a small economy like the UK it seems to me clearly legitimate to think that the path of commodity prices has not had much to do with how monetary policy was set by the Bank of England. The changes in VAT were also not something driven by monetary policy   but rather a policy response to the huge changes in the economy that came in the wake of the financial crisis and to which monetary policy has also been responding. Things are not so clear cut with the exchange rate, where there can, in general, be expected to be a link between current and expected monetary policy and shifts in the value of the currency. But it strikes me as very unlikely that the big depreciation in sterling   all of which happened in  and  (and since when sterling has been stable)   reflected loose monetary policy. Interest rates ended  higher than at the start of the year; they stayed at a level in excess of those set by the Fed and ECB; and actual and expected inflation stayed close to target. Interest rates were cut in  but the major criticism made (largely in retrospect and largely ignoring the fog that Milan Kundera notes is part of life) of the MPC was that interest rates were not cut by enough in  and that policy was far too restrictive. So I think it is a strange interpretation of history that says that the exchange rate depreciation of - was a reflection of a loose monetary policy. Let me get to the key question. What is the right response of monetary policy to the extraordinary combination of events we have seen over the past three years which I have been describing? That is the question the each member of the MPC faces and I want to explain how I see the answer. But just before coming to it let me just remind you what the response has been   and I am aware that a description of what we have done and an analysis of what the right thing to do is are not necessarily the same thing. On the surface it looks a remarkable response   for two years now Bank Rate has been at the lowest level in the history of the Bank of England (effectively zero). There has been a tripling of the Bank s balance sheet as we have purchased assets on a huge scale to loosen monetary policy yet further. If all you knew about the past few years was the inflation rate and the setting of monetary policy   and nothing else   you might conclude that monetary policy has been set so as to generate inflation. You might also think   if you looked back at the history of the last  years   that this monetary policy had not been very powerful. The most expansionary monetary policy in the history of the country had only generated a rise in inflation to % above the target. Of course that would be a very bizarre interpretation once one took into account the circumstances. The reasons for relatively high inflation today are not because Bank Rate is close to zero and the justification for monetary policy being so expansionary is self-evidently not to be sought in today s rate of inflation. Further the observation that Bank Rate is close to zero   in isolation   very significantly overstates the degree to which policy has been loosened since the days of % Bank Rate. The weighted average of mortgage rates, bond yields for corporates, rates on household unsecured credit and the cost of bank borrowing for companies is probably down by about bp since then; Bank Rate is down by  basis points. What matters is the cost of debt   and the return on savings   for households and companies. Even at  % Bank Rate, those rates are in most cases only marginally down on levels of - (Figure ). And of course that Figure only shows interest rates for those that are able to borrow. Let me come back to the key question of what is the right setting for monetary policy. That must depend on what the most likely profile for inflation is and the risks around it. And that depends on international forces largely outside the influence of the UK   for example commodity prices   as well as on domestic factors more directly influenced by monetary policy   the evolution of demand relative to the supply potential of the economy. I think the analysis of those factors outlined in the Inflation Report published last week   which is a collective judgement by the MPC   is one which largely reflects my own assessment. For me the three big features of the current assessment made in that Inflation Report   all of which I think are reasonable   are these: First, inflation is likely to be significantly above target for all of , for reasons that we can understand (at least ex-post) and overwhelmingly reflect rises in commodity prices, changes in VAT and increases in the sterling prices of other imported goods. The significant upward shift in the  projected path for inflation since last November very largely reflects rises in the level of commodity prices since then   nearly all of which are assumed to be permanent. I don t think the risks relative to that assumption (that the rise in commodity prices is not set to be reversed) are obviously skewed to the upside. Second, inflation is likely to fall back quite sharply to target during    and the risks are then pretty much evenly balanced for it being either side of % thereafter. Third   and as noted above   the central outcome is that growth from here on forward is only about at its historical average, or maybe marginally above it. Should that be how things evolve I believe it means that higher unemployment and some unused capacity persist. I think the risks to that central view are also skewed to the downside. This outlook for inflation and for growth is all conditional on Bank Rate following a path implied by market rates which would mean a very gradual removal of the current very accommodative stance of monetary policy. If one knew that the outcomes would evolve in line with those central profiles for activity and inflation I don t see a strong case now for significantly accelerating the process of tightening relative to that. One reason is revealed by Figure . That shows an estimate of the most likely path for seasonally adjusted quarter on quarter CPI inflation consistent with the latest Inflation Report projections (conditioned on market rates). That falls back to a rate consistent with the target (.% a quarter, so % at an annualised rate) by the start of . The actual annual rate of inflation at that point is likely to be higher because that reflects price increases over the course of  when the reaction to recent rises in commodity prices and to VAT is still being felt. To be clear, I think monetary policy could be set so that it is likely that inflation moves back to target significantly more rapidly than is implied by the central profile in the Inflation Report fan charts. Indeed I would go further and say that inflation could probably be brought back to target very fast, perhaps even over a few months. For that to happen, and in the absence of a sharp reversal of the recent rises in commodity prices, it would probably need both a big appreciation of sterling and a significantly greater degree of slack in the UK economy (and higher unemployment) to bring domestically generated pressures down enough to offset the impact of recent rises in prices of imported goods and in VAT. One could use monetary policy to try to engineer that. But I am very sceptical about whether it is desirable: A substantial appreciation of the exchange rate might add to volatility of output in the short term and be unhelpful for re-balancing More slack in the economy probably erodes productive potential and means the levels of output and employment consistent with meeting the inflation target further ahead are lower A sharp tightening in monetary policy now needed to bring inflation to target in the very near term would quite likely mean easing policy again aggressively next year creating volatility I think the trajectories shown in the Inflation Report represent a better way of balancing inflation risks than would be likely if policy was set now to accelerate a return to target at a rate substantially faster than implied by Figure . Of course no-one should feel greatly confident that inflation will follow the central path and gradually move back to target over the course of next year. But I do not believe the profiles are obviously biased or excessively optimistic. For the forecast the assumption is that following the big recent rises in commodity prices today s higher prices are here to stay. That is not a rosy tinted view that the cost pressures are soon reversed. I am not for one moment denying that there is a risk of domestic wages and prices being pushed up as inflation expectations rise and the credibility of the MPC declines. But I think that risk is reflected in our fan charts. And it is a risk that I don t think is most effectively handled by tightening policy at a rate faster than those fan charts suggest is desirable. I also think the credibility and inflation expectations risks are ones best countered by presenting the evidence on inflation, and an interpretation of it, and explaining the response to it rather than by a speed of tightening in monetary policy which   on the basis of the chances of different outcomes   is not one we should obviously adopt. I think one thing should certainly be avoided. This is to try to deflect legitimate questions about past (ex-post) forecast errors by showing how tough on inflation one is with a tightening in policy on a scale which the assessed profiles for inflation and growth do not warrant. The best way to handle past forecast errors   and the MPC forecasts for inflation have been below outturns   is to try to understand why they happened and use that to make the best assessment today of where we might be going next. In doing that we should   like Milan Kundera   be mindful of the amount of fog that existed in the past and the amount that is still around today. As I said earlier you would not want to start from here. But one of the few things we do know with absolute certainty is that here is where we are. How do we stop this sort of thing happening again? How do you reduce the chances of having to start from a nasty position like this again? One aspect of that is to make the financial system   and banks in particular   more robust. The reason this downturn has been so severe   and the reason that  downturn  is therefore too feeble a word to describe it   is that it started as a result of a banking crisis. If we can much reduce the chance of that happening we much reduce the chance of having to start from here again. One way to make the banking sector much more robust is to have banks use much more equity and less debt to finance their activities. I recently wrote   with colleagues at the Bank of England   about the best way to achieve that. The question we explored was what degree of leverage, or equivalently what mix of equity and debt, might be appropriate for banks. We presented evidence that pointed towards the desirability of very much greater levels of equity financing   and very much lower bank leverage   than we have seen in recent years (Figure ). Lower leverage is something that is happening already and the implementation of the capital rules that go under the name of Basel  will take it further. The question is how far to take it   and that depends on the cost of having banks use more equity (and less debt) and the benefits from having a banking system better able to withstand shocks to the value of its assets. I am not going to repeat the analysis done in that Discussion paper   the paper is readily available and its sets out the estimates of costs and benefits in detail. International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) were adopted for the end- accounts. The end- accounts were also restated on an IFRS basis. The switch from UK GAAP to IFRS reduced the capital ratio of the UK banks in the sample by approximately  percentage point in . First we find that under a wide range of assumptions the scale of the benefits from having banks use a lot more equity than they have today very substantially outweigh the costs. This is why I conclude that having banks come to have capital ratios that might be more than twice as high as today (and also higher than under the Basel  rules) is likely to be desirable. The impact on the average cost of bank funds of having capital twice as high as today s levels might only be of the order of bp   one fifth of one percentage point. That would lead to a higher cost of bank-intermediated credit, somewhat reduced investment in the non-financial sector, and a lower long-run level of GDP. We estimate that this decline in GDP will be very small: perhaps around one sixth of one percent of GDP. In contrast, the estimated benefit of doubling capital (or halving leverage) was estimated as being over  times as great. The second point to stress is that were banks, over time, come to use substantially more equity and correspondingly less debt, they would not have to dramatically alter their stock of assets or cut their lending. The change that is needed is on the funding side of banks  balance sheets   on their liabilities   and not their assets. The idea that banks must shrink lending to satisfy higher requirements on equity funding is a non- sequitur.  But there is a widely used vocabulary on the impact of capital requirements that encourages people to think this will happen. Capital requirements are often described as if extra equity financing means that money is drained from the economy   that more capital means less money for lending. Consider this from the Wall St. Journal, in a report on the Basel negotiations on new rules over bank capital: ###newline###  This is pretty much the opposite of the truth. At the risk of stating the obvious: Nor is the capital in any sense  tied up ; it represents funding available to a bank to lend or to acquire other assets. The final point to note is that there is no necessity to move to a position where banks use much more equity financing, and have lower leverage, in a short period. This is a move that is not one which has to be made in a year or two. The big question here is what the banking system should come to look like to reduce the chances of the sort of mess we are now dealing with happening again   happening to our grandchildren and their grandchildren and their grandchildren. This is a time for long-term thinking. After there has been an earthquake which has caused huge damage and loss of life it is sensible to think about how you build buildings; but you don t knock down every building that is still standing and try to re-build everything immediately. When you allow banks to gradually increase their use of equity   and gradually reduce their leverage   over many years the difficulties of making the transition can seem very much less. Consider the following simple scenario. Suppose during each of the next  years, banks retire % of their currently issued debt securities and replace them with equity. These debt securities today make up about % of major UK banks  balance sheet; they do not include bank deposits. If while doing this banks also continued to retain about % of their post-tax equity earnings, as they have done in the past, they could triple the amount of equity relative to their assets within the next  years while still allowing their assets to grow by about .% in nominal terms. If banks used these funds to expand only lending to their customers, they would be able to fund an even higher growth rate for lending while still increasing their capital ratios to % by . What we need to do is to think about the overall net economic costs of having a different banking structure that you get to over a prolonged transition, instead of thinking of the private cost to banks of them hurtling towards a different position over the course of a year or so. That is the issue that the Banking Commission chaired by Sir John Vickers is addressing. I am sure that it is precisely this sort of long view   a view across many generations rather than across a few years   that they are taking.