 In this way, Plato in  The Republic  helps his pupil Glaucon to  picture the enlightenment or ignorance of our human condition . Economic statistics are often only an approximation of the underlying reality they are attempting to measure. Like the prisoners in Plato s cave, we risk confusing the shadows we see with the abstract notions of economic theory. And when a change in the light causes the shadows to change we may become angry, suspecting that we have been misled, failing to see that the truth has not changed and that the different image might be a source of knowledge. This evening, I would like to spend some time looking at the various ways in which data uncertainty might arise, attempting to evaluate the extent of our ignorance, before moving on to discuss how the monetary policy maker might discern developments in inflationary pressure in the face of such uncertainty. In particular I shall examine uncertainty over how the measured money value of spending and output in an economy is allocated between prices and volumes; and how that could affect the relative weight a policymaker might choose to place on measures of growth in the money value or in the volume of national output, and on the level of output and the output gap. ###newline###  Much recent interest has been over data measurement issues and revisions policies. And I intend to devote some time to these issues this evening. But first we should recognise that this is not the only source of data related uncertainty. Even when data can be perfectly measured, there is often a discrepancy between the economic concept that we would like to measure and the real world phenomenon that the statistics attempt to measure. Take money data for example; in my view some of the most timely and accurate data available   largely directly measured, so suffering little from sampling problems, rather less vulnerable to late returns than many other series, and yet a pot-pourri of financial balances held in an arbitrarily defined set of financial institutions for a multitude of reasons, for transactions, savings, a store of value, a buffer stock. Or the claimant count: again, precisely defined and directly measured. But how important is it as a measure of unemployment, or the tightness of the labour market? Both the Retail Price and the Consumer Price Indices are measured from information on the prices of a defined basket of goods and services collected on a particular day each month, weighted together in a particular way. There are some differences in methodology between the two series, and yet both measure the same underlying concept   consumer price inflation. Moving from one measure to another does not mean by itself that our view of the underlying concept has changed, but it does mean that we need to understand how each measure is put together. So, before we even begin to think about how accurately data are measured, we need to give some thought to what it is we are seeking to measure, and how accurately can the data, no matter how well measured, capture the underlying concept. A measure of consumption that we can relate to theories of how consumers behave would be consumer spending on non-durable goods and services plus the flow of services enjoyed from durable goods. But this latter component is not observable. So in practice what the statisticians try to measure is household expenditure on durable goods, as well as on services and non-durable goods. And no matter how well they succeed in accurately measuring household spending, there will still be a difference between that and what we would wish to measure. The Monetary Policy Committee has recently spent some time looking at measures of government activity. We are not alone in this, so has Sir Tony Atkinson who is presently investigating how to improve the measurement of government services. What has become very clear in this work has been the importance in identifying what it is we are trying to measure. For the MPC, the interest has been in identifying the inflationary pressure generated by government activity. That depends on the resources absorbed by the public sector and how that affects the ability of the market sector of the economy to meet the demand for its goods and services. Sir Tony Atkinson s review concentrates on measuring the volume of government output within the context of the national accounts, recognising their dual function as a measure both of economic activity and of welfare. And, as his Interim Review says, any change to  the direct measure of government output should not affect the macro- economic policy stance.   ###newline###  Not all economic series can be directly measured. Many more must be estimated. Gross Domestic Product seeks to measure the total economic activity, the value added, that takes place within the United Kingdom. It would be a gargantuan task to measure this directly, to attempt to track every economic transaction, and would impose an intolerable administrative burden on businesses and consumers. Much of the data that we commonly use therefore have to be estimated from surveys. This gives rise to measurement issues stemming from problems of coverage, sampling and non-response. Official statistics can thus be subject to significant uncertainty, especially in timely first releases. Revisions then inevitably arise from new information that improve the accuracy of the data  a late return perhaps, or a more in depth survey carried out with less frequency. Some may arise from methodological improvements such as the revisions to the measurement of the output of the National Health Service, or the move to annual chain linking. ###newline###  The Monetary Policy Committee recognises that revisions are inevitable. Indeed, in so far as they bring us to a better understanding of the underlying reality, we welcome them. And it is incumbent on us, collectively and individually, to try and make the best decision possible each month in the light of the information available to us at the time and our interpretation of it. In doing so we recognise that much of the data with which we work is imperfect and subject to revision. We recognise that data quality varies within the release cycle, that the preliminary estimate may be different to the final release, and that some series are more reliable than others. It is the job of all users of economic statistics to recognise and deal with this. There is inevitably a trade-off between timeliness and accuracy, but in general, aware of the shortcomings, we would prefer early imperfect data to late perfect series   it gives us something to work with. Relevance   how closely does it accord with the underlying concept we want to measure for the purpose of inflation targeting; Timeliness   is it released within a timescale that makes it useful for policy purposes; Coherence   how well does it relate to other pieces of data, over time and across the economy. We are aware of the scope for revision to many data series and we are continuously developing models that help us assess how much weight to place on a particular observation of data at any point in time. ###newline###  A particular difficulty can be in allocating movements in nominal variables to price and volume changes. This matters for monetary policy; not just because monetary policy is concerned with the price level and its rate of change, but because the policymaker aims to achieve a stable inflation rate by ensuring that the volume of demand for an economy s output grows in line with its potential to supply. And it is on this source of data uncertainty and its policy implications that I d like to concentrate this evening. Conceptually it seems fairly clear. In practice it is fraught with difficulty. If one buys a car one year for  , but a similar model costs  , a year later it might seem straightforward. The price has risen by %. But what if the car now has air conditioning, and a cd player comes as standard? Suppose crash test statistics suggest it has a better safety performance? How do we then allocate the change in the cost of the car between quantity and price? A further complication arises when we are considering not just the output of one good, or the expenditure on one good, but the production or consumption of a basket of goods and services. How should the components of total output or total expenditure be weighted together? In general, national accounts statistics are compiled by bringing together data on values and prices from surveys. Typically, these will be surveys covering, for example, firms' turnover, expenditure, income and profits, consumers' expenditure, income, etc. To calculate the aggregate real volume change, data from the various production sectors of the economy are weighted together, with the weights for each sector typically determined by the current price value share of that sector in whole- economy output in a base year. Direct volume measures are available for few series. Similarly, data for the various expenditure aggregates are weighted together according to the share of that category of expenditure in total expenditure, defined in terms of current value, in the base year. Periods when value shares change notably from the base period, reflecting changing economic structures and relative prices, are therefore periods of high data uncertainty or  mismeasurement . The exact nature of this  mismeasurement  depends on the source of these relative movements and the price elasticities of the goods. The most well known case is that of  substitution bias  with fixed-weight indices. Substitution bias arises if goods the relative prices of which are falling are also those the volumes of which are rising, but such that their value share is decreasing. In that case a fixed-weight index, which failed to update weights as relative prices changed, would overstate volume growth and understate inflation. ###newline###  Like most economic statistics, national accounts data are revised regularly, with revisions taking into account both new information and new methodologies. Regular rebasing ensures that changes in industry structures and/or relative prices are taken into account in the production of aggregate data. Through the introduction of methodological changes such as more frequent rebasing and chain-linking statistical offices are, in a sense, responding to price-volume uncertainty error by periodically bringing in new information on relative prices, and on the relative importance of each sector of the economy. Until last year, the ONS rebased the national accounts every five years. Last September, annual chain-linking of real GDP data was introduced. Real GDP growth in each year (up to ) was calculated on the basis of weights measured as the current price share of total activity in the previous year. The main rationale behind the introduction of annual chain-linking was that annual rebasing would give a more accurate picture of the weight of each sector in the economy. Here we look at vintages of quarterly real and nominal GDP data going back to Q. We have made no attempt to separate the different types of revisions across these vintages, nor to isolate revisions to the price-volume split.  Chart  plots the cumulative revisions in growth rates, where the cumulative revision is defined as the percentage point difference between the initial release of data and the latest vintage (the release of June th  in this case). Table  summarises the statistics on the revisions. Some patterns stand out. First, quarterly real GDP growth and GDP deflator inflation have both been revised up on average over this period, and by roughly the same amount as measured by arithmetic mean revisions (column ). The mean absolute revision in the second column measures the absolute size of these revisions without taking account of whether they were positive or negative. This absolute measure shows that quarterly deflator inflation rates have been revised by more on average than have real growth rates. And the third column shows that deflator inflation revisions are more volatile, as shown by a larger standard deviation, so that it is more difficult to predict them than it is real growth revisions. Revisions to nominal GDP growth are on average larger and slightly more variable than those to real GDP growth. Taken together, this pattern of revisions might suggest that new information on nominal values and prices play a significant role in data revisions. But most interesting for us is to note that the revisions to prices and volumes have been, to some extent, offsetting   the correlation between cumulative revisions to the deflator inflation and real growth across quarters is minus .   at least for this period. This is consistent with the presence of price-volume measurement error in early releases. Price-volume uncertainty in early releases was also apparent in the revisions contained in the  Blue Book, which brought in annual chain-linking accompanied by perhaps the most significant set of data revisions for some time. The real annual GDP growth rate between  and  was revised up by . percentage points on average. The average revision to annual growth of nominal GDP over the same period was zero. This was mainly due to significant upward revisions in real growth and downward revisions in the annual GDP deflator inflation rate in the - period. In terms of components, the revisions to real GDP growth in the  Blue Book primarily reflected revisions to imports and investment. Charts  and  show how the revisions to investment left the level of nominal investment broadly unchanged, but shifted up the level of real investment considerably. The revisions to investment growth primarily reflect a rebasing of producer prices to  (previously ). The rebasing led to downward revisions to investment deflators, and hence upward revisions to volume growth reflecting a greater weight given to those goods such as computers which had experienced rapidly falling prices and rising volumes. More frequent rebasing brings in more information and makes the measurement of real growth rates more accurate. However the level of real output is not comparable across time periods when weights change. A levels series is therefore created by chain linking growth rates across base periods. Not surprisingly therefore, Table  shows that cumulative revisions to the level of GDP are on average higher, though rather less variable around the mean, than revisions to growth rates. Of course, levels data on anything are rarely informative by themselves, but must be understood in relation to something else, such as its own value in the previous period or another variable: GDP in relation to population; debt in relation to assets, and so on. Later we shall look at the level of output in relation to potential, or the output gap. ###newline###  How does the presence of price-volume data uncertainty affect the weight a policy maker should place on different kinds of information when setting interest rates? And if relationships established in old vintages of data stand to be revised, when does this have implications for a monetary policymaker s view of the future inflationary pressure? Here I will focus on two dimensions. First, how much information is there in nominal GDP growth data compared to real GDP growth data. Second, how much weight should a policymaker place on growth as against levels data and estimates of the output gap that are derived from levels data. ###newline###  One response to price-volume uncertainty could be that at times when relative prices change significantly, and trying to assess the split between real activity and a price index is difficult, looking at a money value measure of activity may be informative. As the Governor said last year  it is easier to measure the money value of spending and output in the economy than to split it into estimates of "real" output, on the one hand, and price indices, on the other. That is why the latest data revisions have altered the picture of real growth over recent years, leaving estimated money spending and output broadly unchanged. In such circumstances it is sensible to focus on money spending. Indeed, the success of the new monetary framework can be seen in the stability not just of retail price inflation but also of the growth rate of domestic demand in money terms.  Charts  and  below show the greater stability of the growth rates of nominal domestic demand and nominal GDP in recent years. Here I want to consider the value of nominal GDP data in an inflation targeting regime, where the objective is to keep inflation close to target without excessive volatility in real output. It should be stressed that I am not talking about a nominal GDP targeting framework here. That is beyond the scope of this evening s talk. Here I will consider nominal GDP data as but one in a set of indicators that jointly help understand the development of domestic inflationary pressure as captured by the true, unobserved output gap. In particular I assume that reliable inflation data on the target measure is also available. So the issue is really whether nominal GDP growth data can complement real growth data. A simple way of assessing the worth of nominal GDP growth data against that of real GDP growth data might be to compare how well each would do in estimating the unobservable change in the output gap. Let us suppose that real GDP growth is mismeasured only because of price-volume mismeasurement. Our assumption that the price-volume mismeasurement error affects real GDP growth data in the opposite direction to the deflator inflation data means that nominal GDP is accurately measured. CPI inflation is also accurately measured, but is assumed to diverge from GDP deflator inflation by an error term. Equations () and () below show how each data source is linked to the change in the output gap. For simplicity we assume, for the moment, that true potential output growth is known. Comparing () and (), we can see that there is a trade-off between price-volume mismeasurement and other sources of GDP deflator mismeasurement. If there is greater uncertainty over the price-volume split in nominal GDP than there is over the assessment of GDP deflator inflation, using an independent measure of inflation such as the CPI, then nominal GDP growth data (deflated by CPI inflation) will be relatively more useful in gauging the build-up of inflationary pressure. But if uncertainty over GDP deflator inflation dominates, real growth data may be a better source. Ongoing work using a structural dynamic model of the transmission mechanism calibrated on UK data suggests that as price-volume data uncertainty increases, monetary policymakers should place greater emphasis on nominal GDP growth data and correspondingly less emphasis on the separate uncertain estimates of prices and volume growth in interest-rate setting. But our calibrations indicate that estimates of real growth can't be entirely disregarded, even when the data are very uncertain. ###newline###  We have seen that there can be large shifts in estimated real GDP levels following revision and re-basing. Should this lead us to alter our view of the inflationary outlook? Walsh () has used vintages of data for the level of real GDP for the United States to calculate estimates of potential output and output gaps where potential output is estimated using a Hodrick-Prescott filter. His results, reproduced in Chart , show that estimates of the level of the output gap are subject to significant revision, by up to  per cent of potential output. Looking at these charts, we can see that if we were to take these estimates at face value we would judge that data mismeasurement seems to affect the estimate of the level of the output gap much more than it affects estimates of trend growth or real growth. Table  compares the revision in the output gap level to the revision in real growth rates, showing that both the mean and the standard deviation is much higher. This is of concern since output gap mismeasurement has played a significant role in policy mistakes of the past. This analysis might suggest placing less emphasis on output gap estimates, and correspondingly more on growth rate data. The suggestion that for practical data measurement reasons we should place more emphasis on rates of change than levels has some history. For example Federal Reserve Board Governor Edward Gramlich discussed whether, because of measurement error, policymakers should concentrate more on the rate of change of real variables than their levels, within acceptable margins, in judging how much inflationary pressure was building up in the economy. But is this essentially mechanical approach to estimating the output gap sensible? Let us suppose that following a re-basing the level of real GDP is much higher whilst the CPI inflation data remains unchanged. Should our view of the output gap have changed, or might the revisions suggest that the level of potential output is also much higher than previously thought, such that the estimate of the output gap has not changed? In other words, should news in the revision cause us to change our view of the inflation outlook? There are good reasons to be wary of estimates of output gap uncertainty derived from mechanical approaches. In addition to the variability of GDP levels data, mechanical estimates of the output gap are derived by assuming that potential output is either fixed or is a smoothed trend in real GDP.  Hence, by construction, the potential level is unlikely to change as much as the real GDP level. This assumption may be incorrect, indeed it is likely that potential output will vary in response to real changes to, for example, investment, technology, demographics or preferences. Moreover, the mechanical method takes no account of other information such as inflation data, the labour market or surveys of capacity utilisation, all of which the MPC uses to inform its judgement as to the amount of spare capacity in the economy. The mechanical approach also assumes that only aggregate real GDP data is relevant. But disaggregate information on relative price movements might influence our view of supply. If we were to allow such additional information, we might find that our best guess of potential output would shift along with our best measure of actual output following a revision. Looking at disaggregate data would also mean acknowledging that rebasing has given us access to potentially relevant new information. In this respect it may be useful to look at the shifts in relative prices in ONS data and consider what factors might have driven them. We have seen that a change in the price-volume allocation of nominal investment growth was responsible for a large part of the upward revision to GDP growth rates in the  Blue Book. If we look at the main expenditure components of GDP, we can see from chart  that the relative price of investment, both whole economy and business, has trended downwards since the early to mid s. This could be an example of what economists have referred to as investment-specific technological progress, related to improvements in the efficiency with which we can generate productive equipment capital. This would suggest that those goods that have experienced falling relative prices are those that are capital-intensive in their production and distribution. Consumer durable goods that, once purchased, yield services over time, also tend to be capital-intensive. And although the relative price of consumption as a whole has not changed much over decades, as shown in Chart , within the broad categories of household consumption there are substantial differences between consumer durable and non-durable goods. Chart  shows that while the relative price of non-durables has been stable and that of services has trended upwards since , the relative price of both durables and semi-durables has fallen since the mid s. Chart  plots the relative prices of the three main components of durable consumption. The downward trend in the relative prices has been due to a sharp decline in the relative price of  recreation and culture  goods, which account for just over % of all durable goods, and include such items as audio visual equipment and information processing equipment. It thus appears that those sectors that have experienced falling relative prices and rising volumes are predominantly those with a higher rate of technical progress. Of course there is an international dimension to this, as many of these goods are purchased from abroad. But it could be consistent with  strong underlying productivity growth that is difficult to discern in the data [ ] associated with investment in ICT . This could be a factor which might have raised the rate of growth of potential output, with implications for our assessment of the output gap. ###newline###  We can rarely directly observe the economic concepts we might hope to measure. Not only might the concepts not map easily into real world phenomena, but the real world will often not lend itself to direct measurement and will have to be estimated. Such estimates will be subject to revision as more information becomes available. And at times a new methodology might help bridge the gap between the measurable real world and the underlying concept, or enable improved estimation of the real world phenomena. Revisions to data stemming either from more information or methodological improvements will inevitably lead us to reassess our view of the underlying truth. As the prisoners in Plato s cave found when the Guardian tried to enlighten them, this is not always comfortable. But it is an inevitable part of the policy maker s job, and that of other users of statistics, to make sense of revisions. Improvements to statistics should be something we welcome, not criticise. I have argued that understanding the nature of data uncertainty and revisions should inform our judgments about the world. In the presence of price volume uncertainty for example, we may find that measures of nominal values contain useful information, which can supplement the imperfect estimates of real variables. Data on the level of GDP appears more prone to mismeasurement than growth rates, and we should be wary of conventional mechanical estimates of the output gap, which rely heavily on levels information. I argue that we should not ignore other relevant information and the relative price data used in the rebasing process may itself be informative. We should remember that the true understanding in Plato s cave comes not when the one prisoner is forced blinking into the light and sees the true objects for the first time, but when he goes back in to the cave and comprehends how the interaction of the light, the objects and the wall of the cave produce the shadows, which is all that those who are still captive can see. King, M.A. (), Speech at the East Midlands Development Agency/Bank of England Dinner in Leicester on  October . Orphanides, O. and S. Van Norden (), The Unreliability of Output Gap Estimates in Real Time, Centre Interuniversitaire de Recherche en Analyse des Organisations (CIRANO) Working Paper no. s-. Power, J. (), Durable spending, relative prices and consumption, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Spring . Woodford, M. (), Inflation Stabilization and Welfare, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No .