 Judging by the macroeconomic data, either there have we have been blessed by extraordinary good luck over interruption for  quarters.  Unemployment has fallen The policy debate   inside and outside the Bank   has changes in the way our economy functions. Less than essentially because the MPC wanted to stimulate private aggregate demand of weak net trade, given adverse ethceondoemgryeebeoifndgeambasonrdbpedre, sastuterenstiaonndsthhifetierdimtopgliacuatgiionngs some simple statistical relationships, a question has been extent to which demand pressures feed through into Lower variability in output growth and inflation, lower demand pressures   all told, this points to the 
change, business s can indeed ucceed by embracing it That underlines he value of the Bank s dialogu with across the United Kingdom. Colloquially, you enrich our tphueznzlehsewlpes suesetionmthaetcdhaytao.ur various real-world stories to fdleumctaunadtiopnressisnuriensflfaeteiodnthanrodu, gmhotroe ignefnlaetriaolnly., how Economic policymakers draw on a number of ways of There is no model that can, uniquely, capture the anyone running a business. Namely, that firms charge a their various inputs   labour, capital, raw and and costs varying according to current and prospective indeed crudely, in Diagram . The key feature is that Tinhfelumenocnee.tary framework is one such structural               O  e of the mostcouraging features of the post- taanrcgheot rfeadirltyowthelel,teaxrpgetct(aCthioanrst of).inUflnactieorntahinatvye abbeoeuntwell with labour and other costs later  catch g up . In either wfuhtuatret.heAygtahininskimispgliofyininggt,otwhoapfepaetnurteosinarfleataidodneidnttohtehe wholesale   prices to the retail prices which the Bank obviously, retailers   add another mark up, reflecting the economy affecting any of the links in this (stylised) Implied volatility of a three-month option on a ten-year swap contract and ten-year option on a twenty-year swap contract various monetary regimes tried out by UK governmts judge what rate of inflation the authoriti s wereying outlook for inflation. As feared by one distinguished vmeonntuetraer[yripsokslicbye .i(n)g]Intrtahnosfsoercmirecduimnstotaancsepse,ciut lmataiyonweolnl outturns were a good basis for guessing the near-term By contrast, the current regime ses, so far at least, to pdreilciveesr, ifnirgmins fmlaitgiohnt winelllinpelawceitmh othree wtaeriggehtttohnanponicryecent explanation for the much lower persistence in inflation I economy cause inflation to deviate from target, firms return to target fairly quickly   which would, of course, vein, firms and households might now expect the shifts in demand. In which case, the influence of such inflation, would plausibly be somewhat weaker than in But sound monetary policy is not the only important ainpfpluaerennctesfronmfiervmens  acobsrtisefanexdapmriincaetsi.onI sohfarlel adli-seccuosnsojmusyt Lcoambpoeutritimveacroknedtitions in product markets. 
been well documented.() In particular, industrial operate, and union membership has fallen (Chart ). pUrsoegoref spsaivret-ltyimreefowromrekde,rsinhcarseainsicnrgeaisnecden(Ctihveasrtto)w, oinrkp. art also more flexible ideas about working patterns. The each other   job search   have improved, helped by recently by the internet. In combination, these developments  provided  the decade without adding to infl t nary pressure. During accordingly increased by more than would otherwise aggregat demand woul have put less pressure than ehfofewcetveorn, tfhiramt st hceofsetesda-nthdrporuigcheso. fTdheamt adnodespnreostsumresnin, to apparently flat relationship, illustrated in Chart , If that continued, with new residents continuing to help athvaeileacbolneotmo yUcKobuuldsipnoetsesnestiwalolyuladccinocmrmeaosde,aitme pstlryoinnggetrhat available data do not really enable us to get beyond ###newline###  imfplureonvecmeseantt winoroku. rF tiersrtm, fsoorfstormadeey . eTarhsawt emeanjoty, esdimapnly we produce and export rose relative to the aggregate tightened. To the extent that this explanation should be pointing to an upside risk to earnings growth looking 
One c aracterisation of the past would b that firms and finance; and that banks loosen d or tightened credit cycle, reining back whe the economy suffered a UfinnaitnecdeKdiunrgidnogmth, etheiasrilsy welldso  cruemceesnsitoend.(fo)r small-firm Although the stability of output growth over the recent reasons to think that cyclical swings in the av lability of past. In the first place, the greater stability brought by A more stable macrconomic e vironment may al o, by npeurmhbaeprs osof minefluciernccuemssftoasntteirailnegvcidoemnpce oitfiothna. tTihne, rfoeris 
cernehdaint craettihoneierdaibnilaitny etococnoopme iwcidthowcynctluicrnal; eacnodnommaiyc shocks, output growth and inflation may vary a little less respond less aggressively than in the past to keep the But, again, it can be difficult to disentangle cyclical from premium priced into financial instruments. To pick firm%sinhaveacctoesosvteor the%innteorwna(Ctihoanratl co)m.  mOeurrclialgpeaspter, markets for managing their financial risks. For smaller to have been an expansion in asset-based financing effectively. It is a commonplace that competition has intensified. Tfahmisiliara. ssWoocrialdtetdrawdiethha gslogbroawlisnatrieolant .ivTehteo fwaoctrsldaroeutput notably in Asia, have become material participants in the of their production, or outsourced to firms operating in these developments, although also increased     investment and in consumption has steadily risen eviously especially competitive. So long as that tgeivnedntosebt eoflodweemratnhdancownoduiltdioontsh. eIrnwiasdedbiteioimn,pilfieadndby any more aggressive in controlling costs in the face of One striking example is the distribution sector. intense. This seems to manifest itself in the aggregate disintermediating wholesale distributors, whose margins effect was, for a period, to open up a gap between inflation (Chart ). In other words, for a while some feed-through of demand pressures into retail price ###newline###  between cyclical and structural influences when forming unavoidable that policymakers must try to do just that. Tpohlaitcyb. rings me to the current conjuncture and so to recent rise in CPI infl ion suggests, for example, that we And, as I discussed earlier, the puzzle about the apparent somewhby the Committee s judgement that the yfeeeadrst.hTrohuagt hletaoveins fclaotniotinn,ulionogkidnegmaahnedadp.reWssiuthresmloikneeltyatroy concluded at the MPC s latest meeting that our interest The first concerns the precision with which any old days, it should probably have been clear when the      In today s world, when we discuss excess or deficient deviations from trend than in the past, s Chart  condition lie w l within the margin of error of n gthiveeencuonoemryta. inIntyaasbiomuiltatrhveesintr,uwcetu ralacnhdancogmesmaeffnetcattionrgs 
mwaesasu.re%o. f CPI inflation was .%.  By January  it Second, when inflationary problems loomed in the past, households and in financial markets   increased, both inflation exTpoedcatya, twioenasp, pwehairchtoweilnljaofyfewcetlpl-raincceh-soertetidng modern economic models of various kinds   inside and anchoring medium-term expectations. If that were so, In fact, credibility is not something that can just be re-achieved, by policymakers   through our actions, particular model, but one that draws on a wide range of Ltheearnneixntgfeisw, aycecaorrsd, ifntghlye, ienchoenroemnty ienscoauprems ibsesiong.  Over