 We have been through an exceptionally severe recession   output has fallen very sharply and unemployment has risen a great deal. Confidence about the standard of living we might expect for our future selves and our children has been shaken. Such events will always be likely to affect the value of long lived assets and few assets have as long to live as houses. Willingness and ability to buy them will be hit by falls in incomes and by greater uncertainty about the future. This will affect lending and house-building. But the impact on the housing and mortgage markets over the past few years has been greater than is usual even in a bad recession   even a recession that has been as deep as we have seen. And that is because this recession started with the near collapse of the banking system. The level of net mortgage lending has fallen to a small fraction of the average for the 5 years leading up to the start of the crisis in 2007. The number of transactions in the housing market is running at about half the levels of 2002-2007. Numbers of housing starts have also about halved since the start of the crisis. Average UK house prices, in real terms, are about 20% below the levels of mid 2007. Thankfully   and unlike in the USA   re-possessions of property and arrears on mortgages have not picked up dramatically. I want to explore how persistent the fall in activity in the housing market   and for transactions and lending it has been a dramatic fall   might be. There are two views I want to consider. The first is that what we are seeing is a painful transition from a position where the cost and availability of mortgage debt was unsustainable (and may have fuelled unsustainable expectations about house price rises) to a more sustainable position. On that transition activity   in terms of lending, housing transactions and house-building   will be very sharply lower. But the transition does not last decades, though it may take some years. The second view is that we may be stuck in a bad equilibrium of low confidence, low willingness to lend which is unwarranted by the risks, and impaired ability to buy; and that we cannot be confident that these things will self-correct. Neither of these hypotheses suggests things will be easy   but the first is less bad. On the first view, it is as though we have bad toothache but at least we are in the dentist s waiting room. It is not a nice place to be, but we will not be here for too long. On the second, we have bad toothache and there is no dentist in sight. Let me say at the outset that I believe the evidence is more consistent with the first   the less bad   of these interpretations. That does not mean that the situation is easy since the transition is difficult   as can be visits to the dentist   and its length is measured in years rather than months (as I shall try to calibrate). And even when the transition is over it poses policy problems   one of which (though not necessarily the most serious one) affects monetary policy. Since monetary policy is what I do it is an issue which I will say something about later. To assess how much of what we are seeing in the housing and mortgage market is a transition from an unsustainable position to something more sustainable we need to start by looking at where we were before the financial crisis. Let me begin with the cost and availability of mortgage debt, because I believe that is where the un-sustainability was most evident and it is the move towards a more durable structure of mortgage supply that drives most of the adjustments we are seeing. Chart 5 shows a measure of the cost of mortgage funding, and of the average interest rate on one of the most common forms of variable rate mortgage, over the period since the late 1990 s. The cost is a weighted average of the interest rates (or yields) on sources of funds for the major mortgage lenders. The quoted spread on new mortgage lending   that is the difference between a measure of the cost of funds and the interest rate charged on new lending on tracker mortgages   declined fairly steadily between 2000 and the onset of the crisis. At the end of the 1990 s that spread was around 2% to 2.5% (Chart 6). This spread needed to cover the cost of running some substantial part of the institution and in particular the non interest rate cost of gathering funds (which for many lenders included a substantial part of the cost of running a branch network). It also needed to cover expected bad debts and generate a risk adjusted return on capital in excess of the cost of debt. That spread seems to have fallen gradually over the course of the period from 2000 to 2007. By the middle of 2007 it had fallen to 150bps   more than 30% below the average spread over 1998-2000. ###newline###  What is the impact of going (back) to a world where the pricing and the availability (or lack of it) of high LTV mortgages looks to be more sustainable? A simple back of the envelope calculation can be very helpful here   one using figures that are not wholly unrealistic. I want to use such a calculation to illustrate the impact of requiring higher deposits of new home owners. Imagine that initially people can buy a house with a 5% deposit. Assume that a house for a first-time buyer costs 4 times their annual income. So they need to get a deposit that is 20% of annual income. That is a substantial sum and one which with a saving rate of 5% takes about four years to accumulate from the point at which you start saving7. Suppose as a potential first time buyer you are in a position to start doing that at age 28, so typically you buy at age 32. Now assume that   suddenly   the deposit needs to be 10%. That means a potential first-time buyer needs to have a deposit worth 40% of annual income and this requires 8 years of saving at a rate of 5%. Other things equal this means the typical age of a first time buyer rises to 36. The transition from one equilibrium to another   assuming the requirement for a higher deposit is sudden and unexpected   is stark. In the stylised example, for about four years after the sudden shift in the required deposit no first-time buyers can enter the market. But after that the flow of new first-time buyers goes back to its normal level. The level of owner occupation, however, is likely to be permanently lower. Assume we have a constant population. People leave home at age 20 to rent. Before the rise in required deposits they start saving at 28 and buy at 32 and then stay in owner occupation until, say, age 75. Everyone (sadly) then moves back into the non-owner occupied sector for the last 5 years of an 80 year life. In this stylised version of the UK the proportion of adults (that is people aged 20 to 80) who are owner occupiers is then: When the required deposit goes to 10%, so the age at which people buy their first home becomes 36, the new equilibrium owner occupation rate is: The chart below illustrates this transition. The green line shows the evolution of the number of house purchases by first-time buyers; the red, dashed, line is the owner occupation rate. How does this model compare to real data? The UK owner occupation rate was near 70% in 2006; it has since moved down to 67%. Over the same time, the number of loans granted to first-time buyers has about halved. The fact that this number has not fallen more, as the stylised model would predict, can probably in part be explained by additional assistance that has been given to first-time buyers, for example in the form of shared equity schemes or help from parents. Indeed, the CML estimates that the share of first-time buyers under 30 who received some form of assistance about doubled from about 40% to just over 80% (Table 1).8 It is notable that not only have transactions by first-time buyers fallen sharply   loans to home movers are also down sharply. I believe this reflects the importance of first-time buyers in allowing chains of transactions to be feasible. ###newline###  A lower owner occupation rate does not imply a loss in wealth or a fall in the standard of living. Across countries there is not a positive correlation between average standards of living and rates of owner occupation   if anything across the world as a whole there is a negative correlation. So a move lower in the rate of owner occupation is not in itself something we should necessarily worry about. But a collapse in first-time buyers is not so easy to live with   and the stylised example shows that after an unexpected rise in the required deposit there is not a gradual decline in first-time buyers but instead a collapse. But it is a collapse followed some years later by a return to the old level. The demand for property is not so volatile because people do need to live somewhere   in the stylised example above there is a net increase in the demand for renting and that builds up year by year over the transition.  It is reflected by the rising rental stock   the flip side of the falling owner occupation rate in the figure. In the real world many people suddenly faced with the prospect of having to save for longer to become owner-occupiers may live at home longer, so the offset of bigger demand for (new) rental properties against lower demand for owner-occupied property is not complete. And for builders of new houses that is extremely difficult. I think the stylised calculations suggest that a very big fall in first-time buyers, much lower transactions, and much lower new mortgage lending are what you would expect in a transition from one equilibrium to another. And where we started from in the UK was neither desirable nor sustainable (in terms of pricing and type of mortgage loans). The transition is not likely to be as smooth as the stylised example suggests.  There may be a degree of overshooting   maybe the  right  deposit needed to go from an average of 5% to 10% and maybe we have gone from 5% to 15%; and perhaps risk pricing will overshoot. Neither of those things is obvious, but they may have happened. But I think the bigger point is this: even a smooth transition to a more sustainable, efficient and fair pricing of mortgages would   given where we started from   likely have lead to big falls in lending, many fewer first-time buyers and much reduced housing transactions during an extended transition. In the stylised example it is a transition that lasts 4 years. This is why I think the first of the two hypotheses I described at the outset   the one that saw the recent outcomes as largely reflecting a difficult transition rather than a broken machine   is the more likely. Since we can explain the big falls in activity as being consistent with the transition story we don t really need to invoke the  it s a broken machine  (i.e. bad equilibrium) explanation. That second interpretation of events is, it seems to me, a suitable victim for Occam s razor   a simpler explanation explains the facts. One piece of evidence that what we are seeing in the UK housing market is transitional (and is seen by existing home owners as transitional)   rather than a permanently new state of very sharply lower transactions and permanently reduced first-time buyers   is what has happened to house prices. They have not fallen by 50% or 60%. In nominal terms average UK house prices are down about 10% from mid 2007; in real terms they are about 20% lower. If housing demand were thought to be permanently down by as much as the decline in first-time buyers since 2007 I should expect the fall in house prices to have been far, far greater. ###newline###  The transition to a new equilibrium in the housing and mortgage market is not easy. Are there also problems in a new steady state? There may be, but a lower owner occupation is not one of them and it does not mean there must be a lower demand for housing. Pricing of mortgages will be different from what had become usual in the years immediately before 2007. Some people will pay more for mortgages; but some will pay less   recall that one of the bad aspects of where we were that there was perverse cross subsidisation in the mortgage market. It is also likely that the average spread between the interest rate on mortgages and a reference rate like Bank Rate will be different   and quite likely higher than it was just before the crisis. That does create an issue for the MPC.  We need to re-calibrate the link between Bank Rate and the cost of debt to finance house purchase. In principle this is not a great problem. In practice such calibration is tricky and that spread between the rate we on the MPC set and the average cost of mortgage debt is likely to take time to change. So it is not a simple, one-off re-calibration. There may also be a shift in the type of mortgage debt as a result of persistent   maybe permanent   changes in the scope to fund mortgages in certain ways. Since 2007 the issuance of residential mortgage backed securities (RMBS) in private markets has collapsed. In the past RMBS tended to be relatively short-dated instruments and paid rates that were often variable. They were often issued in foreign currencies because natural buyers were not UK institutions with an appetite for sterling-denominated instruments. Those who had previously bought RMBS in large quantities exited the market as the crisis unfolded. Maybe they will return. But if one stands back from the drama of the crisis and asks whether  the type of RMBS that were issued are a natural funding vehicle for UK mortgages there are reasons to question that. Mortgages take many years to pay off   even if people move house they generally need to take debt with them so it is usual for people to have substantial mortgage debt for decades. UK households   who overwhelmingly receive income in sterling   naturally want sterling mortgages. If people want long-term, sterling-denominated loans then one would expect that the natural source of funds would be from investors who want long-term, sterling assets. But the buyers of RMBS often wanted short-duration, non-sterling denominated assets and they wanted the option of withdrawing from the market   getting their money back from lenders-quite quickly. When that option was exercised (i.e. when RMBS issuance to replace maturing issues dried up) it caused major problems with which we are still living. A more natural source of funds for UK mortgages might be from institutions who want long-term, sterling assets   for example pension funds and insurance companies. But they may also want fixed rate instruments. Market forces can be expected to work to bridge gaps between potential suppliers and potential demanders of products and this may work in the mortgage market now to cause an evolution in the type of mortgages so that the nature of the funding and the essential nature of the debt it allows to be created are better matched. We need a means of financing mortgages which generates secure and reliable funding. The natural providers of such funding are investors that want to hold sterling assets for long periods. Households have a substantial demand for direct holdings of such assets which is why many lenders finance a large proportion of lending from raising retail deposits. As noted above, a natural source of intermediated demand should be from long-only, institutional investors   pension funds and insurance companies. But in recent years the business model of most mortgage lenders meant that they did not generate mortgages with the degree of predictability of cash flows suited to creating longer duration securities.  That was a particular business model built around creating variable-rate mortgages, often with teaser rates, sold in an environment where mortgage brokers facilitated huge amounts of churn and re-mortgaging. This generated cash flow uncertainty which precluded creating longer duration securitisations. And the RMBS that were issued often needed a good deal of financial engineering even to create short duration securities that appealed largely to overseas investors. That world has gone. We should neither expect, nor want, it to return. It is not at all clear how this will play out and over what horizon. As it plays out the link between the decisions the MPC make each month on Bank Rate and the impact on the economy will change. In the longer run it is not clear it makes life more difficult. But today we are still in the middle of a transition and it is a difficult one. In the mortgage market it may look like we have taken many steps back. I think that is too pessimistic. I believe it is more likely that we are taking some difficult steps forward.