 For foreign policy , the question facing an intervention decision is whether this is Munich (deter) or Vietnam (accommodate)? For monetary policy, the question is similar but reversed: is this the 1930s (accommodate) or 1970s (deter)? The underlying dynamic today is parallel to the 1930s, but we have avoided repeating that for several reasons: Is there a risk to go from such a state to one of overheating and inflation  or inflation and contraction (aka stagflation)? Bruno and Sachs (1985), Blanchard and Gali (2007) show that all of them have to interact to (re)produce the 1970s The theoretical literature on central banking (and some press) treats monetary policymaking as under constant suspicion The empirical evidence has not supported this view (Blinder, McCallum, Posen on CBI; Kuttner and Posen on CB governors) A reasonable discourse and accountability, not a  trigger strategy  game of needing to pre empt (fighting the last war?) Note: t denotes the start of the sharp acceleration of consumer prices until 1989. Sources: Office for National Statistics and Bank calculations. Note: t denotes the start of the sharp acceleration of consumer prices until 1989. Source: Office for National Statistics and Bank calculations. Note: t denotes the start of the sharp acceleration of consumer prices until 1989. Source: Bank of England, including Bank calculations. Note: t denotes the start of the sharp acceleration of consumer prices until 1989. M4 prior to 1998 Q4; M4 excluding intermediate OFCs after 1998 Q4. Source: Office for National Statistics, except for consumer price data before 1989, which are from the OECD. Bank of England calculations. The spread is calculated as the difference between UK ten year gilt yields and average yields on German government bonds with a maturity greater than three years. Source: for the average earnings index before 2000; Office for National Statistics for whole economy AWE since 2000 and for the household consumption deflator. Bank of England calculations. Note: t denotes the start of the sharp acceleration of consumer prices until 1989. Source: Office for National Statistics and Bank of England calculations. ###newline###  Source: for the average earnings index before 2000; Office for National Statistics for whole economy AWE since 2000 and the household consumption deflator. Office for National Statistics for the unemployment rate. Is there a major supply shock, or an exaggerated response to one given high demand? But we rely on futures markets for our oil price forecast, and those are only flat to slightly upward Lots of talk about output gap, but trend both matters more and is more measurable (Kuttner and Posen (2001, 2004)) The UK economy has shown great adaptability and limited evidence of sectoral or labour market mismatch to date Direct measures of the way that supply shocks are usually felt   corporate liquidations, investment shortfall, long term unemployment   have not yet accumulated to very much impact GDP data tends to get revised up after recessions (particularly in UK) and there is an obvious candidate in Net Export measures Note: t denotes the start of the sharp acceleration of consumer prices until 1989. Source: Office for National Statistics and Bank of England calculations.