 In the early 1970s in France, Germany, the United Kingdom (UK) and the United States (US), more or less the same proportion of the population of working age were actually working (65-70 per cent). And, on average, they were working roughly the same number of hours per year (1850- 1950). By contrast, in Sweden, more people were working (74 per cent) but much shorter hours per year on average (around 1650 in 1973). In Italy, many fewer people were working (55 per cent) but about the same average hours (1868 in 1970). Three decades later some things have changed a lot, others very little. In France and Germany, average employment rates have fallen a little and average hours per year have fallen dramatically to just over 1400 hours. In the UK employment rates are much the same but average annual hours have fallen slowly but steadily to below 1700 hours. In the US, the employment rate has risen a little and average annual hours have fallen a little. Interestingly, US employees now work more hours per year, on average, than employees in any of the rich countries of the OECD1. Little has also changed in Sweden over the last thirty years, with the employment rate remaining high and annual hours falling only very slightly. Italy also still has an exceptionally low employment rate but annual hours here have fallen a fair bit (to around 1600) but not to the levels reached in France and Germany. Overall, as we shall see, the picture with regard to market work is quite complicated. Generally, the Scandinavians, along with the Dutch and Swiss have the highest employment rates. The Americans, Australians and Japanese work more hours per year than the rest. The Southern Europeans (and the Belgians) generally have the lowest employment rates but not the lowest annual hours which may be found in Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands and Norway. Adding employment and hours together, we find that Americans, Australians and New Zealanders are the hardest workers, on average, and the French, Italians and Belgians work least hard2. The hardest working countries work about 40 per cent more than the least hard working. The fact that this number is so large has instigated a significant body of research which has often focused on why, in particular, Americans work so much harder than the average European. An empirical overview may be found in Nickell (1997) (Table 2 and Table 7, col. 3) and this suggests that employment protection, taxes and unco-ordinated unions tend to be associated with lower labour input. On top of this, there is a great deal of empirical evidence on the determinants of overall employment rates including Nicoletti and Scarpetta (2002) and Nickell et al. (2003). By  and large, they come to similar conclusions, namely that unions, taxes and employment protection are associated with lower employment rates but if union activity is co-ordinated, the impact of unions and taxes is moderated. Furthermore, there is some evidence that low levels of competition in product markets is also associated with low employment rates. More recently, Prescott (2004) argued that taxes are the key, explaining more or less all the variations in labour input across countries. Davis and Henrekson (2004) also emphasise the importance of taxes. Both these papers echo the results of Daveri and Tabellini (2000) who find that labour taxes can explain most of the fluctuations in unemployment in those countries which do not have co-ordinated pay bargaining. This strong emphasis on the role of labour taxes has been criticised on the grounds that it is inconsistent with the bulk of the cross-country evidence, basically because of omitted variable bias (Nickell, 2003), or on the grounds that it is inconsistent with the evidence on labour supply elasticities (Alesina et al., 2005). In the light of this, it is perhaps worth pursuing the forces underlying fluctuations in the volume of market work per capita a little further. In  the next section, we look at the current overall picture and how it divides into annual hours and employment rates. We then look at the history of both these, emphasising the huge variations across the different countries. In Section 3, we focus on changes in the participation rates of different sub-groups of the population, notably, prime-age men and women as well as older men. We also consider overall unemployment rates.  In Section 4, we analyse annual working hours, trying to explain the large differences in the changes since the early 1970s. Finally, in Section 5, we summarise our findings and provide a synthesis of the various explanations of changes in labour input over the last thirty years. ###newline###  In Table 2, we divide annual hours into hours per week and weeks per year. An alternative picture, based on different data, may be found in the Appendix. Broadly speaking, the outcome is much the same although there are large differences for one or two countries. Hours per week vary relatively little across countries except for the Netherlands which has by far the highest number of part-timers. More interesting is weeks worked per year, where there is much variation. Weeks not worked generally consist of either of holidays and vacations or of absences due to sickness or maternity leave. In practice, absences due to labour disputes, training and so on are of minor significance. Looking first at vacations and holidays, what stands out is that these are between two and four weeks lower in the US than in any of the other countries. This is possibly due to the differences in data sources, but it is also consistent with the fact that many workers in the US only have one or two weeks paid vacation per year, which would be illegal in nearly all OECD countries.  Unfortunately, we do not have comparable data for other non-European countries but we do know that Australian workers, for example, have a legal minimum of 5.8 weeks holiday and vacation time each year (see Table 15, below). Other absences are a residual and consist mainly of sickness or maternity leave. There is a good deal of variation here which may, in part, be due  to measurement error. The data in two tables in the Appendix present some alternative numbers which again show significant variations in sickness and maternity leave. These we investigate further below. Overall, we see that annual holidays and vacations are much the same in most countries with the notable exception of the United States. On top of this there are wide variations in weeks of other absence, mainly sickness and maternity leave. ###newline###  Having seen how labour inputs vary across countries, it is worth looking at how employment rates and annual hours worked have changed over the last three or four decades. Starting with employment rates, a striking feature of the numbers in Table 3 is that in the early 1970s, the pattern of employment rates across countries was much the same as it is today. The Scandinavian countries plus Switzerland have always had the highest employment rates and still do. Spain, Italy and Belgium have always had the lowest employment rates and still do. Some countries have seen significant increases, most notably the Netherlands, with smaller increases in Norway, Canada, New Zealand and the US. In every  country, the employment rate of women has risen, by anything from 10 to 35 percentage points. Finland is the exception here, partly because it had high rates of female participation even in the 1960s. Typically, therefore, the employment rates of men have declined over the same period.  Finally, of course, these employment rates have been affected by the dramatic fluctuations in unemployment in the 1970s to the early 1990s. Underlying this relatively stable pattern are some significant changes in the employment rates of a variety of different sub-groups which we shall pursue below. Turning to the history of annual hours in Table 4, the changes over the last three or four decades are much larger than the changes in the employment rates. In 1970, in nearly all countries for which data are available, annual hours were typically between 1850 and 1950. However, in Sweden and Norway, annual hours were already well below this level despite a very buoyant demand for labour, with unemployment rates in the two countries being 1.2 and 1.6 per cent, respectively. By 2004, some countries had seen dramatic changes. In France, Germany and the Netherlands, annual hours fell by around 500 from 1970 to 2004, in Norway and Japan, the fall was around 400 and in Ireland and the UK the fall was close to 300. By contrast, in Sweden Australia, Canada and the US, the fall over this same period was between ###newline###  First, we can see in Table 5, how employment and inactivity rates differ across both men and women and different age groups. We focus here on the over 25s because we do not wish to pursue questions about participation in education. There are a number of interesting features of Table 5 which are worth following up. First, while the employment rates of prime age men (25- 54) do not appear to vary very much, there are some quite striking differences in inactivity rates for this group. Furthermore, the inactivity rate now exceeds the unemployment rate in nearly every country.  Second, the inactivity rates of older men (55-64) differ significantly across countries from Belgium, France, Italy and Austria where over half of older men are inactive to Sweden, Switzerland, Japan and New Zealand where less than one quarter are inactive. Third, inactivity rates among prime age women are over 30 per cent in Ireland, Italy, Spain and Japan and around 15 per cent in Scandinavia. Interestingly enough, inactive women are not specifically looking after children. Since the 1990s, the inactivity rates of women are inversely correlated with fertility rates across countries. So in what follows, we focus on each of these  three issues, starting with inactivity among prime age men. ###newline###  The history of this aspect of labour input is set out in Table 6. Back in  the 1960s and early 1970s, prime age male inactivity rates rarely exceeded 5% by any significant amount. By 2004, only two countries have rates below 5%. Countries where prime age men have inactivity rates exceeding 9% today include Finland, Norway, Sweden, UK, Australia and the US. This is an odd group of countries because, by and large, they are noted for their relatively high levels of labour input. Thus, by contrast, France and Germany have particularly low levels of prime age male inactivity and the EU average is only 7.6%. The evidence  which we have on this issue suggests that a significant proportion of these inactive men are categorised as long-term sick or disabled (European Labour Force Survey). Furthermore, we know that the rules governing entry into the disability benefit system are crucial, because exit rates are generally very low. In some countries, these rules were significantly weakened in the last thirty five years, in others not. Thus in Bound and Burkhauser (1999), Table 17 we find the following: ###newline###  So in the US and Sweden, the numbers more than double from 1970 to 1995 whereas in Germany they barely change. In the UK, they rise even faster (see Faggio and Nickell, 2003). ###newline###  Blondal and Scarpetta (1998) present a detailed analysis of the incentive issue and their panel data regressions reveal the importance of financial incentives in determining early retirement. In the 1995 column in Table  7, we present, in parentheses, the estimated inactivity rates were pension systems to be made actuarially neutral up to age 64. In many European countries, this makes a substantial difference. Duval (2003) extends this work and in Table 8, we report the implicit tax rates on those working between 55 and 64 generated by the early retirement and  pension systems. Then, in Table 9, we show some of Duval s regressions simply to illustrate the importance of implicit tax rates in determining early retirement. For example, an implicit tax rate at age 60 of 50 per cent will generate a fall in participation of 8.5 per cent. In the parentheses after the 1999 column in Table 7, we show Duval s estimates of the inactivity rate were early retirement schemes to be removed and actuarial neutrality introduced up to 64. Again, they show big effects for many countries taking the inactivity rates back to 1970s levels. Interestingly, by 2004,  we can see that inactivity among older men has started to fall in a significant number of countries, particularly those where early retirement incentives have been reduced, notably Finland, Denmark and the Netherlands. ###newline###  The overall picture is provided in Table 10 and this shows that there has been a continuing fall in inactivity among prime age women in nearly every country. But inactivity rates are still high in Ireland, Italy, Japan and Spain. Indeed, far higher than in much of Scandinavia in the 1970s. Furthermore, whereas in the 1970s, fertility was positively  correlated with inactivity across OECD countries, it is now negatively correlated.  So in the low inactivity countries, women not only work more, they also have more children. Much micro-econometric work and the cross-country analysis in OECD (1990), Chapter 6 and Jaumotte (2003) suggest that marginal tax rates may be important here. So in Table 11, we present the marginal rates facing married women at zero hours and when they are earning 67% of average earnings given their spouses are earning 100% of average earnings. Here, we see some significant cross-country variations, particularly at zero hours. If, by some mechanism or other, married women have their own tax allowance, their marginal rate at zero hours will be zero. At the other extreme, their earnings may simply be added to their husband s for tax purposes, so their marginal rate will be the same as their husband s. It is plain that high marginal rates at zero hours generate a strong disincentive to working a low number of hours per week. Even at more normal hours, however, there are large variations in marginal rates across countries. The implications of these and other variables may be found in the panel regressions explaining participation in Table 12. Marginal tax rates have important effects, as might be expected, with 10 percentage point increases in both the rates included in the regression reducing participation rates by around 3 percentage points. The strictness of employment protection laws on regular employment has a significant negative effect as does union density. Introducing measures of business sector labour productivity and male unemployment in column 2 has little impact on the key variables noted above. The negative impact of these new variables is not easy to interpret because they are potentially endogenous3. They are only introduced because they have been included in other work (eg. OECD, 1990, Table 6.3 and Jaumotte, 2003, Table 5) and it is worth checking that they do not change the key results. The  same argument applies to the inclusion of variables capturing public expenditure on children and parental leave. These will also tend to be endogenous but their inclusion has little impact on the marginal tax rate and employment protection effects. The impact of union density is, however, eliminated. Overall, marginal tax rates and employment protection seem to have relatively robust negative effects. However, the time dummies in the regression in column 1 reveal a background rise in female participation by 14 percentage points and this is even bigger after we add in further variables in column 3. The implication of this is that there are further factors driving female participation which we are not able to capture. Furthermore, looking at the trends in inactivity implicit in Table 10, it is plain that there are large differences across countries. For example, there are very significant differences in apparent preferences about part-time work. This is important, because a willingness to work part-time clearly helps in obtaining a job. In Table 13, we show the percentage of these who work part-time and the percentage of these who do so voluntarily. Thus in Finland and Spain, few women work part-time despite married women facing zero marginal tax rates at zero hours. Furthermore, around half of these do so  involuntarily . By contrast, in the Netherlands, more than half the working women are part-timers and the vast majority of them wish to be so. In summary, we can identify certain variables such as marginal tax rates and employment protection, which impact on the participation rates of prime age women. But explaining why the vast majority of prime age women in Scandinavia were active in the labour market by the early 1970s when only a small minority were economically active in Italy and the Netherlands, and why the changes in subsequent decades differ so much, is not easy on the basis of standard economic variables. In all the countries, there are a number of causally interacting trends among women going at different speeds in different countries   rising education, falling fertility, rising participation, rising expenditures on child care, rising productivity, rising wages. Sorting out these interactions remains to be done. ###newline###  Since a great deal is known about the subject (see Nickell, 2003 or Nickell et al., 2005 for example), we comment only briefly on overall To avoid high levels of unemployment, the following policies seem to work. First, a social security system which concentrates on placing individuals in jobs. It is important that specific people in the employment service are responsible for specific workless individuals. Further, employees of the employment service must be well trained and have the correct incentives. They can employ a mixture of carrots and sticks. The actual level of benefits is not particularly important. Second, having the right sort of wage determination system. If there is a high level of collective bargaining coverage, some degree of co-ordination of bargaining is required. High coverage alongside low union membership as well as decentralised and adversarial bargaining typically results in high unemployment. Also helpful are relatively low labour taxes and the absence of very strict employment protection legislation. Finally, a deregulated service sector helps to sustain a buoyant labour market when, inevitably, manufacturing employment is on a downward trend. This completes our discussion of the important factors determining employment rates. We next turn to hours worked per year by the employed. ###newline###  Despite the huge variations in annual hours worked by the employed4 across the OECD, less is known about this than about employment rates. As we have already seen in Table 4, except for Sweden and Norway where female participation was very high, annual hours in 1970 were between 1850 and 1950 in most countries for which data are available. Since that time, annual hours have fallen by anything from 100 to 150 in Sweden, Australia, Canada and the US to around 500 in France, Germany and the Netherlands. We have already noted that variations in annual hours are driven, in the main, by holidays and paid vacations and by sickness and parental leave. Looking over time, we see from Table 15 that in many countries there has been a significant increase in the minimum annual paid leave governed by legislation. In both Italy and the UK, there was no legislation until the  late 1990s when the European Working Time Directive (November 1993) was incorporated into national legislation. By and large this made little difference in practice because annual paid holiday typically exceeded four weeks in Italy and even as far back as 1981, average annual weeks of holiday for manual workers in the UK was 4.2 (see OECD, 1990, Table 6.1). Perhaps the most noteworthy point is that the US is unique among the developed OECD countries in having no legal minimum to annual paid leave. Another contributory factor to changes in annual hours is the incidence of part-time work. This is not, of course, an explanation of changes in annual hours since it is merely one of the mechanisms by which the hours which people choose to work are expressed. In Table 16, we see the history of part-time employment. In many countries, there has been an increase in part-time employment, but it remains below 20 per cent in most countries. The UK, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Japan and Australia have a significant proportion of part-time employment, mainly among women. Southern Europe generally has the lowest level of part- time work. Turning to sickness and maternity leave, in Table 17 we present information on the percentage of employees in receipt of publicly provided sickness and maternity benefit. Interestingly, in many countries we see that this percentage has fallen from 1980 to 1999. Then in Table 18, column 1, we convert this into average weeks of leave which we then compare with some other measures. These are reasonably closely correlated although the fact that the average weeks in receipt of benefits exceeds the absence measure provided by Alesina et al. (2005) for the US suggests the latter is understated. Nevertheless, there are significant differences across countries in the amount of sickness/maternity absence and, presumably, a significant proportion of those differentials is due to the variations in the rules governing benefit payments. So legislation on paid vacation leave and sickness/maternity benefits obviously has some impact on working hours, but what about the underlying forces at work, including those which drive the legislation? In Table 19, we present some panel regressions. Looking first at the tax variables, there is a positive impact on hours from the marginal rate facing women on zero hours where their husband is working. This is consistent with the fact that high marginal tax rates at zero hours discourage low hours jobs. By contrast, the marginal rate facing married women with working husbands earning two-thirds of the average wage has a negative impact on hours as might be expected. The same applies  to the average tax wedge. However, the marginal tax rate facing a single earner appears to have a small positive effect, although it is hardly robust. Employment protection has, if anything, a negative impact on hours, perhaps reflecting the fact that impressing managers with long hours is less of a requirement if jobs are secure5. Despite this, union density appears to have a robust positive impact on hours, consistent with the results reported in Bowles and Park (2005), Table 1, Column I. This is, however, inconsistent with the emphasis placed on the idea that trade unions encourage shorter working hours by Alesina et al. (2005). Earnings dispersion itself is, of course, influenced by labour market institutions, even when the dispersion of skills is taken into account. For example, Nickell (2004) reports a simple cross-country regression which finds that the 90/10 earnings ratio is significantly negatively influenced by union coverage even when controlling for skill dispersion captured by the dispersion of test scores reported in the International Adult Literacy Survey (OECD, 2000). Koeniger et al. (2004), in a more extensive analysis, find that both trade union density and employment protection tend to reduce earnings dispersion and hence hours. This indirect effect  of union density via earnings dispersion is -0.167 which does not quite offset the positive union density effect in column 2. Overall, therefore, we find that various aspects of the tax system, employment protection and union density impact on working hours. Perhaps the only surprising result is that union density is positively related to hours, even when taking account of its negative impact on earnings dispersion. ###newline###  The first story which is frequently used to explain cross-country variations in labour input is based on labour taxes, a recent example being Prescott (2004). The evidence we possess indicates that taxes cannot be the whole story. The tax story is inconsistent with the tax effects on labour inputs generated by microeconometric studies (Alesina et al. 2005) and those generated by cross-country studies (Nickell, 2003). For example, if we apply the tax data to the annual hours regressions in Table 19, we find that the contribution of tax changes to the changes in annual hours from the early 1980s to the late 1990s is very small, probably less than 10 per cent. A second story would be in the same spirit as the tax story but adding in all the other elements of the social security system including early retirement benefits, sickness and disability benefits, unemployment benefits and so on. As we have seen, these are certainly good at explaining the changes in some aspects of the labour input, notably inactivity among men, both prime age and old, as well as a part of the changes in unemployment and female participation. But shifts in annual working hours are a major part of the story and here, while labour taxes have a significant impact, they explain only little of the overall picture. A third story is that favoured by Alesina et al. (2005) who argue that the nexus of strong unions, generous welfare benefits and social democratic governments imply both high taxes and direct pressure towards less work. This latter is partly driven by work-sharing in response to adverse shocks and partly by the not unreasonable belief that long holidays are a good thing for workers, hence laws governing minimum levels of paid annual leave. In practice, all developed OECD countries bar the US have such laws, even those such as New Zealand and the UK where unionisation  has collapsed. However, the work-sharing story applies clearly to Germany and particularly France, where incentives to reduce labour supply have consistently been applied in response to increases in unemployment, culminating in the imposition of the 35-hour week in France in the late 1990s. However, it is hard to see how the same story applies to Sweden which has stronger unions, more generous welfare benefits, higher taxes and more social democratic governments than either France or Germany. Yet it has one of the highest employment rates in the OECD and only a small fall in labour input since the early 1970s. Thus, overall labour input in Sweden was 3% below that in France and Germany (average) in 1970 and 26% above in 2004. Both Italy and the Netherlands also had only small falls in labour input from 1973 to 2004, but for very different reasons. In both countries, labour input in 1973 was exceptionally low. In Italy this was because female participation was very low, with an employment rate of around 30%. Furthermore, the retirement age was 60 for men and 55 for women, at least five years younger than in any other European country. For example, it was 67 for both men and women in Denmark  and Sweden. So it is no surprise that in 1973 and, indeed, even in the 1960s, Italy had the lowest employment rate in the OECD. And it still does. Add in only a modest fall in annual hours and we find only a small fall in overall labour input. There is no strong element of work-sharing here. Indeed, the Italian labour market model, with minimal welfare benefits and very strong employment protection, places a great deal of weight on the position of the male head of household, which is not to be undermined either by the presence of a high earning wife or by the loss of a job. Thus the unemployment rate of husbands at 2% was, in 1992, among the lowest in the OECD (see OECD, 1994, Table 1.19). While the labour input in the Netherlands was also exceptionally low in 1973, the subsequent history is completely different. The employment rate of women in 1973 was extraordinarily low in the Netherlands at 28.6% but by 2004 it had risen to 65.7%. As a consequence the overall employment rate had risen by 17 percentage points, by far the largest increase in the OECD. But the majority of women in employment in the Netherlands work part-time, so average annual hours fell dramatically. The overall consequence of this was that the total labour input had barely changed by 2004. strategies have been embraced wholeheartedly and labour inputs have fallen dramatically in the last thirty years. The upshot of this is that there is no clear, simple story which will explain the cross-country pattern of labour inputs over the last forty years. The incentives embedded in the tax and social security systems of the different countries are clearly important and explain many features of the pattern. But they are far from being the whole story. Trade unions, and indeed the population at large, have embraced work-sharing strategies in response to adverse shocks in France and Germany. This has helped to drive down annual working hours by around 500 since the early 1970s. This liking for work-sharing strategies is not, however, shared in the  more corporatist societies of Denmark, Sweden and Finland perhaps because they have a different view of how the economy works (see Saint- Paul, 2004). Here the tax/legal framework is used to enhance work/life balance, with very high labour force participation and relatively stable annual hours, which have fallen little over the last thirty years despite numerous adverse shocks. Broadly speaking, we can discern three groups of countries, Anglo- Saxon, France/Germany, Scandinavia where there is some sort of coherent story to be told about their pattern of labour input and the role of taxes, benefits, unions and other labour market institutions. But further countries, such as Italy and the Netherlands, do not fit into any of these three groups, and different explanations of their labour input patterns are required. Overall, while it is plain that the tax/benefit system and unions and other labour market institutions are important in explaining labour input patterns across the OECD, other factors are involved which are not The data refer to all workers, both full-time and part-time, and to full year equivalents. So, hours per year refers to those working a full year. Numbers in parenthesis are negative. Define net change in expected pension wealth over 5 year period of working   DPWYR   OECD Employment Outlook, 2004, Table 1.5. Weeks of absence due to sickness and maternity are derived by doubling the last column of Table 1.5. This adjustment reflects the OECD best guess of the correction for under-reporting. For the US, we take the number from Alesina et al. (2005), Table 3. Thus, they work more hours per year, on average, than workers in any other OECD country aside from the Czech Republic, Greece, Mexico, Poland, the Slovak Republic (OECD, 2005, Table F).  However US annual hours are of the same order of magnitude as those in Australia and New Zealand. This, of course, refers only to market work. It is sometimes argued that a great deal of market activity in some countries is replicated by non-market activities in others, partly for tax reasons. For example, far more time in Germany is spent on food preparation in the home than in the US, where a far higher proportion of food expenditure is in restaurants (see Freeman and Schettkat, 2001). However, the data reported in Alesina et al. (2005), Table 17, indicates that the Germans spend much less time in the home on child care and housework than Americans and that they spend more or less equal amounts of time on leisure activities. Labour productivity may be affected by changes in female participation, and unemployment rates may easily be influenced by omitted factors which also affect participation. Annual hours refers to the hours worked in a year by workers who work for the whole year (or full year equivalent workers). They may work part-time, however. Also, it refers to hours actually worked, not hours paid for. Perhaps because, if jobs are secure, unauthorised absence is less likely to be punished by job loss. In Koeniger (2004), Table 3, columns (5), (6), we find the coefficient on union density is -