 I would like to thank Alina Barnett, Adrian Chiu and Amardeep Parmar for research assistance and I am also grateful for helpful comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. The UK economy has set some unenviable records in recent years. The recession of - was the deepest since the s. The period since then, a phase of the cycle when output normally expands rapidly, has instead seen little, if any, growth. As a result, the economy is still % smaller than it was in mid-. If you exclude the period immediately after the Second World War this is the worst five-year growth rate since the first half of the s (Chart ). Remarkably, output is % smaller than it would have been had it grown at its previous (post-war) trend rate. Just as remarkable, however, is the comparative strength of employment and inflation. The empirical link between output and inflation is imprecise   Chart  plots a Phillips-curve relationship between the two, and the pre-crisis R-squared is .   but, taken at face value, and given the scale of the downturn, it would have led one to expect a steep fall in inflation in recent years. The pre-crisis correlation between GDP and employment growth is much tighter (Chart ) and the divergence from it all the more striking. In more normal times, the % drop in output since mid- would have been associated with an % decline in the number of jobs. Instead, and despite a contraction in the public sector, aggregate employment has risen slightly over the last five years. The likelihood that the past relationship could explain more recent trends is .%, a one in five hundred chance. One explanation for this is labour hoarding. Because it is costly both to fire and to re-hire employees firms may have hung on to staff in an expectation that demand will pick up. Another is that underlying productivity growth has slowed. In that case, weak output may not be the result purely of weak demand. It may instead reflect an independent hit to supply, one that explains why employment and inflation have been relatively high. As extremes, these two hypotheses can have very different implications. If the first is true, then without a strong pick-up in economic activity, employment and inflation are likely to decline. Finding themselves in the position of a cartoon character that has run off the edge of a cliff, but is not yet aware of the fact, firms will at some point have to face reality and trim their under-employed workforce. Cost growth and inflation will then fall. If, instead, supply is (and remains) the problem, we could continue to see below-par output growth without any such implications for employment or inflation. They are not mutually exclusive, however, and my own view is that both have a part to play. Because most people are more familiar with the demand-side explanations   we are unused to thinking about supply factors as a determinant of output except over some vaguely-defined  long run    I will concentrate my efforts on discussing (i) why it s hard for demand alone to account for the data and (ii) how an independent hit to supply might plausibly have occurred. In particular, I will suggest that our predicament may be partly caused by significant cross-sectoral disturbances   things that have had differing effects on different parts of the economy   and a failure of the financial system to reallocate resources in response. If this is true, the economy s lost potential is the result of a misallocation of capital, rather than any form of  technical regress . In that case it needn t have been lost forever. In time, as the financial system heals, and investment starts to flow, the economy could well expand at an above-trend rate (without generating inflation), catching up some of the ground lost over recent years. But knowing when that might happen is very hard to judge. It s not at all easy, therefore, to say how productivity will evolve over the MPC s forecast horizon. That s why, in its last Inflation Report, the Committee widened the width of the  fan chart  around its forecast for economic growth. In the concluding section I will discuss briefly how monetary policy might be set in an environment of heightened uncertainty about productivity growth. ###newline###  That demand is independently weak is, I think, indisputable. We know there are signs of spare capacity, both within firms and in the labour market. Nor is there any shortage of candidates when it comes to potential hits to spending: fiscal tightening, slow (UK-weighted) global growth and (via their effect on household income) rises in commodity prices are all things that can reduce demand and output independently of the economy s capacity to supply it. To that extent, the comparative strength of employment may simply be a reflection of  labour hoarding , or something akin to it. If so, then some of those currently employed are actually  hidden unemployed , economically idle but kept in jobs by firms  expectations that output will at some point pick up and by the costs of hiring and firing. If these expectations are disappointed   unless economic activity does recover   this surplus labour will eventually be discarded. Even before that happens, it s possible that the  hidden unemployed  could exert downward pressure on wages in the same manner as people that are formally unemployed. For several reasons, however, I find it hard to see how this can be the only explanation for what s happened to the economy. First, there s the scale of the divergence in Chart . Note that the pre-crisis relationship in Chart  already allows, implicitly, for any stable degree of labour hoarding over that period. So it s not enough for such a phenomenon to exist. For labour hoarding alone to explain Chart , the incentives for it have to have become suddenly and dramatically stronger than in the past, sufficient to add an additional % to employment. Yet it s hard to see why that might have happened. After all, it s not as if businesses have become more optimistic about future growth over the past three years (one thing that would encourage them to hang on to surplus staff). Nor, to the extent one can measure them, does there appear to have been a material increase in the costs of changing employment. 
not so much the weakness of lay-offs but the strength of new hires (Chart ). The private sector has created more new jobs in the past two years than in any two-year period (at least) since the data on gross flows began in . But if firms are hoarding labour   if even their existing employees are surplus to current requirements   why hire new people at all? Third, though there are signs of spare capacity they are more moderate than you might expect if the economy s supply potential had been growing at some uninterrupted rate since the crisis. Chart  plots a swathe of business-survey measures of spare capacity against deviations from a fixed-growth trend in GDP. This suggests that spare capacity within firms is considerably smaller than would be the case had capacity continued to grow at its pre-crisis rate. i.e. for the recent data to have come in below the pre-existing line. But there s no sign of that at all. At least in how they affect wage growth, these  hidden unemployed , if they exist, look just like any other employed people. This doesn t mean they don t exist. But it does suggest that they would actually have to get laid off before they exert any downward pressure on pay and then on price inflation. ###newline###  If the weakness of productivity is not due solely to the combination of weak demand and something exceptional in the labour market, what else might be at work? I think we should look instead at the capital market   in other words the way in which productive assets get financed and allocated. I say this partly because it is not uncommon, during and immediately after financial crises, to see weak productivity growth and (relative to output) higher-than-usual inflation. During the  banking crises covered by Bordo and Eichengreen s dataset, annual productivity growth is on average .% points lower than at other times. Table , which plots the results of a regression on the same dataset, shows that, for given output growth, inflation is higher during financial crises. It is also less well correlated with output growth. Thus the empirical  Phillips curve  looks both higher and flatter than during normal periods (though the latter effect is statistically insignificant). These patterns suggest that the UK s recent experience has something in common with other financial crises and, therefore, something to do with finance. ###newline###  The cost of capital: I say it too because there are plausible mechanisms by which crises might have such effects. One is that finance becomes more expensive. This encourages firms to substitute towards labour (which is now relatively cheaper), reducing capital and output per employee. Chart  plots an estimate of the gross cost of capital for UK-quoted firms. If anything, this understates the rise in financing costs because it doesn t allow for credit rationing and excludes those firms (generally small, unquoted companies) that are likely to be most affected by it. Yet even on this measure the cost of capital is currently close to bp higher than over the pre-crisis decade, a proportionate increase of almost a quarter. On standard models, this would be enough to reduce the level of productivity (relative to trend) by around %. The predicted impact would almost certainly be bigger if we had an accurate measure of the cost of credit rationing. On the face of it that goes some way to explaining what s happened, and my own belief is that dearer  finance probably has contributed to slower productivity growth. But, in truth, it s hard to build a strong case on the basis of the data we have and the simplest of economic models. For one thing, that bp gap has emerged only recently. For much of  and early  (after the aggressive easing in monetary policy but before the start of the Euro area crisis) the cost of capital in Chart  was lower than before the crisis. Yet the productivity numbers looked odd even back then. It s possible that credit rationing effects, unaccounted for in Chart , were particularly strong at the time. But even if that were true, there s a second and bigger problem regarding the strength of investment. At least in this simple, one-sector model, the rise in the cost of capital affects productivity entirely through a collapse in capital formation. It s this that reduces capital intensity (as the existing stock depreciates) and, as a result, output per employee as well. But that s not what s happened. Though it fell sharply after , private-sector investment certainly didn t come to a halt (Chart ). As a result, the aggregate stock of capital, conventionally measured, hasn t fallen nearly fast enough to account for the drop in productivity (the red line plots what would have to have happened to investment for this to be the case). The allocation of resources: If weaker demand and more costly capital aren t enough, between them, to explain the slowdown in productivity growth, what else might be at work? One possibility has to do not with the rate of accumulation of capital resources in aggregate but their allocation across the economy. In the real world, the economy is made up of lots of different sectors and firms. As macroeconomists we often ignore this texture and treat the economy as if it were made up of a single,  representative  firm. We talk about  the economy , for example, and say  it is  operating above or below potential. Similarly, we often argue that  firms are  doing this or that, lumping them together into a single, homogeneous whole. This is fine if the shocks hitting the economy are the same for everyone (uniform across sectors). It s also reasonable, it turns out, if the resources used in production   capital and labour   can be easily moved from one sector to another. In that case, a purely relative shock   a drop in the demand for sector A s output, say, and an equivalent rise in the demand for B   would do nothing to aggregate output or productivity. An incipient rise in the relative price of A would increase returns in that sector, drawing resources away from B until factor prices (wages and the rate of profit) are re-equalised. At that point A s price falls back and, even if its mix has been altered, the combined output of the two sectors is unchanged. Note, however, that during this interim period, when resources are still moving, aggregate output and productivity is lower than it otherwise would be. This is not because of an inadequacy of aggregate demand. Nor does it reflect a loss of technical know-how in any individual sector. In this experiment, at least, what prevents the economy producing as much as it did, given the shift in relative demand, is a misallocation of resources. Following that shift in more needs to go to A and less to B; only if that re-allocation of capital and labour occurs is the economy capable of producing what it did; a failure to re-allocate resources therefore impairs the economy s productive potential; and the rise in A s price, and the disparity in returns across sectors, is a measure of the cost of such a failure. ###newline###  So much for the theory. I think there is evidence of this effect at work in the post-crisis data in the UK, particularly when it comes to capital mobility. We begin with Charts  and , which plot cumulative changes in output volumes and prices respectively   all as standard deviations from a pre-crisis mean   across  sectors of the economy. It s clear there s been a marked divergence in growth rates and price inflation, at a sectoral level, since the crisis hit in mid-. Chart  summarises these graphs by plotting the cross-sectoral spread in output and prices at each point in time. I won t discuss here why exactly these shifts have occurred, but it s easy enough to think of examples. The rise in commodity prices has had a big impact on the aggregate economy (via a generalised reduction in household income, for example). But it is also likely to have affected some sectors much more than others. Similarly, the credit crunch has hit everyone. But the fact that the UK has relatively large banks, and that it was already a net borrower even prior to the crisis, probably meant that demand in purely domestic-facing sectors was always more vulnerable than others to the ensuing contraction in the supply of credit. Anyhow, whatever the underlying causes, the fact of this sectoral dispersion is undeniable. And what has been required, to avoid any impact on aggregate productivity, is a similarly sharp reallocation of resources. All else equal the rise in energy prices would normally prompt more investment (and employment) in the more energy-efficient parts of the economy. The relative hit to domestic-facing business requires a similar shift   so-called  rebalancing    towards tradable output. As far as the labour market is concerned, the signs are that this is precisely what has happened. The divergence in output growth has been matched by an equally steep increase in the dispersion of employment across sectors (the blue line in Chart ). The fact that employment has been able to migrate across sectors has been sufficient, it seems, to prevent any widening in the spread of wages (the red line). This suggests that labour has been relatively mobile. The same cannot be said for capital. There certainly seems to have been some movement. Despite shrinking in aggregate, investment in some sectors has risen. As a result, the dispersion in the estimated capital stock   this time measured across only  sectors   has also gone up (this is the red line in Chart ). But it s not risen as much as the dispersion of employment (Chart ). Nor has it been enough, more to the point, to put much of a dent in the spread of rates of return (relative to the pre-crisis averages) that has emerged since the crisis. This suggests that there may still be unexploited opportunities from capital reallocation, and an equivalent cost to the productive potential of the economy. Firms whose rates of return have risen   those in the hypothetical  sector A , where demand is relatively strong   find themselves capital constrained. They would ideally like to invest at a faster rate, but are forced instead to hire more employees to meet demand. By contrast,  Sector B  firms are kept in operation despite making lower returns for investors. ###newline###  The way I ve described it, this  capital mismatch  would occur either if the economy became less able to reallocate resources or if it faced a greater need to do so. So it s possible that what characterises financial crises is not so much lower capital mobility but an exceptional degree of cross-sectoral volatility. There are also other channels through which this kind of  churn  might affect productivity (so even if capital markets were working perfectly). For example, some economists have argued that, because employees get more skilled the longer they ve been in a job, sectoral re-allocations directly (if temporarily) reduce average skill levels. I certainly don t want to discount these possibilities, any more than one can rule out the possibility of an exceptional degree of labour hoarding. If ever we arrive at a satisfactory explanation of the slowdown in the UK s rate of productivity growth it s likely to include several factors. We have all heard accounts of how small businesses with profitable business ideas have been unable to finance them. At the same time, the FSA has suggested that there s widespread  forbearance  by banks of loans in breach of pre-existing covenants (commercial property lending in particular ). It s hard to know how significant these things are for the macroeconomy. But they would help to explain the strikingly low rate of corporate births and deaths through this cycle (Chart ). And they would certainly have contributed to the dispersion in profits we observe in the data. ###newline###  As empirical macroeconomists we are brought up to believe that economic cycles are determined purely by demand-side factors   consumer or business confidence, for example, or conventional macroeconomic policy (whether fiscal or monetary)   while supply-side factors (the size and skills of the workforce or things that determine allocative efficiency) matter only for the long-run level of output. For the most part this is justified by empirical evidence. It is hard to get the simple models that are good at describing income determination across decades (and countries) to match the data at higher, cyclical frequencies. Those short-run relationships   the pro-cyclicality of employment, unit labour costs and inflation, for example   seem to point to independent movements in demand along fixed, upward-sloping supply curves (for goods and labour). The period since the financial crisis began in mid- confounds these patterns. Output has shrunk, the first time that s happened over any five year period since immediately after the Second World War, and before that the s. Yet employment, seeming to defy not only the historical data but gravity itself, has risen. Unit costs (average pay divided by productivity) have grown faster than over the previous five years, and faster than %. The same goes for the CPI, even if you strip out energy prices and VAT. On the face of it, this looks more like a contraction in supply along downward-sloping demand curves. Some of the slowdown probably reflects special factors. Perhaps it s harder to depress nominal wage growth the closer it gets to zero. This could help to explain why the Phillips curve looks flatter not just in the recent UK data but in other financial crises too. Some of the strength of employment may well be due to an exceptional degree of  labour hoarding , as would be expected if firms are unusually uncertain  about demand prospects. It s also possible that output growth has been under-measured. But the greater the scale of the divergences in Charts  and , and the longer they go on, the harder it is to believe that there hasn t also been a genuine hit to the economy s effective supply capacity. There needn t have been any  technical regress  for this to have occurred. A combination of uneven demand (across sectors) and an impaired financial system, one that is unable to reallocates capital resources sufficiently quickly to respond to such shocks, is enough to reduce aggregate output per employee. Such a process would also give rise to precisely the volatility in relative prices and the widening sectoral dispersion of profitability we ve observed in the data. Some firms, it seems, are kept in business (and retain employees) despite making relatively low returns. Others, able to expand but unable to obtain the finance to do so, are forced to substitute labour for capital. It s hard to imagine this dispersion in returns can persist indefinitely. Assuming the underlying shifts in relative demand are permanent, the economy must in the end adapt to them. Indeed, at some point, once the financial system returns to health, one could imagine exactly the reverse process: a long period of above-trend productivity growth. It would certainly run against the grain of post-war experience if But predicting when that might happen is extremely difficult. It s this uncertainty about future productivity growth that persuaded the MPC to widen further the width of its GDP  fan chart  in the last Inflation Report. It also matters how (if ever) it does so. If productivity improves because investment begins again to flow into the higher-yielding sectors of the economy, policy wouldn t need to do much. If, on the other hand, it recovers because funding for the lower-yielding sectors gets pulled, it would do so via lower aggregate employment. This would play out much like the end of labour hoarding and would require easier monetary conditions to avoid an undershoot of the inflation target. How, amidst all these uncertainties, should monetary policy be set? Precise rules are best avoided in these circumstances   we are painting with a pretty broad brush   but it s worth making a couple of observations. First, we should set policy not just on its ability to affect demand but its capacity to improve the flow of finance in the economy as well. Much of this lies outside our control, and depends, as I argued in a speech earlier this year, on events in the Euro area. But that doesn t mean domestic policy is powerless. If, as the MPC expects, the Funding for Lending Scheme helps to promote the supply of finance across the economy it s likely it will also improve its allocation. Second, as monetary policymakers, we should probably pay less attention (than we normally do) to movements in output and relatively more to changes in employment  . We may be less confident than usual about the origins of a given change in output (i.e. whether it s  demand  or  supply  led). What we do know is that, whatever the original disturbance, and as long as the supply of labour (and therefore the  NAIRU ) is relatively stable, we re likely to want to  ease  policy  if  employment  falls  (because either This isn t simply a theoretical point. As Chart  demonstrates, the relationship between employment and inflation has proved more stable through the crisis than those between either of those variables and output (Charts  and ). Finally, if I have to take anything else away from all this, it s the realisation that we have much still to learn! Thank you.