 This speech is based on joint research with Rodrigo Guimaraes. I would like to thank Yad Selvakumar, Clare Macallan, Silvana Tenreyro, Michael Saunders, Thomas Belsham, Julia Giese and Matt Waldron for help and insightful comments Today I want to delve deeply into the history of short term real interest rates and equity prices in the UK. My main motivation for doing so is to try and gain some insight into what drives the equilibrium level of real interest rates. This is key in understanding where interest rates might end up in the coming years and why, and will help us gauge to what extent current levels of interest rates are unusual or even  unprecedented . Adding a second asset price, equities, to the analysis gives us an important extra dimension along which to verify our story: a simultaneous explanation of both real rates and equities is more convincing than an explanation of real rates alone. As I have discussed in previous speeches, in the pre-crisis decade many central bankers and central bank observers thought of the equilibrium level of real interest rates as being broadly constant. The level in the UK was thought to be around 3% real, or 5% nominal (3% real rate + 2% inflation target), give or take a percentage point. Once short-term shocks to the economy dissipated, this was the level that interest rates were expected to return to. Based on my long run analysis I will argue that it is misleading to think of the medium term equilibrium real rate as a constant.1 Real interest rates move around a lot, and those changes can be persistent. Changes have been driven by both nominal factors, e.g. what the central bank targets and how credible it is, as well as real factors, e.g. the structure of the economy and the financial system. I will provide some theoretical arguments on what determines the equilibrium real rate, and I will provide some data and some model calibrations that suggest the theory matches the data rather well. This will be a two-step story. The first step is to understand that the equilibrium real rate depends on how risky the economy is, and that this riskiness changes over time. The second step, somewhat more speculative, is to try to understand why the riskiness of the economy may change. Crucially, the riskiness of the economy is not just determined by how volatile it is, but also by the extent to which booms and busts are asymmetric (the skew), and by the likelihood of outturns that are very far from the mean (kurtosis or fat tails). It turns out that the asymmetry of booms and busts, as well as the fatness of the tails, have changed significantly over the past few centuries: in the past century, business cycles have become more asymmetric and more fat-tailed, relative to the gold standard era of the 18th and 19th century. And these changes can explain why equilibrium interest rates have shifted down significantly relative to the gold standard era, and why the equity risk premium has moved up. For the second step of the story, namely why the asymmetry and fatness of the tails have changed in the way the data show they have, I offer only a tentative answer. I suspect the increase in the importance of private sector debt and financial intermediation plays an important role, which in turn was facilitated by moving off the gold standard. An economy where debt and financial intermediation play a more important role can allocate resources more efficiently and achieve a higher growth rate, but also becomes more fragile. Small set-backs can have amplified downside effects and even lead to a financial crisis, while there is less scope for a large boom in an economy which already runs fairly efficiently. Lastly, I examine sub-periods of high and low real interest rates during the past century. I show that periods of low real rates coincided with high risk events: wars, breaks in the monetary regime, financial crises or some combination of these. And low real interest rate regimes have coincided with falls in the ratio of private credit to GDP, i.e. the private sector was deleveraging. I note that the deleveraging trend since 2010 seems to have come to an end, or at least a pause. That may be telling us that equilibrium real rates are now rising slightly, although other drivers of low real rates do not show any signs of turning yet. In this section I want to look at the properties of short-term real interest rates and equity returns over a very long period of time. The UK is a unique country to study because of its long history of having a central bank, its long history of having well developed capital markets, and good availability of financial and macroeconomic data going back several centuries. I use the annual average of short term market rates2 as the short-term nominal interest rate, and subtract inflation to obtain a real interest rate.3 Figure 1 shows the real short term rate and excess returns on equities since 1800. The next two charts in Figure 1 show the component parts of the real interest rate: the short-term nominal rate and the rate of inflation. As is immediately obvious, real short-term interest rates fluctuate in a wide range. There are peaks of nearly 20% and troughs of nearly -20%. The chart also shows clearly that the current level of real short-term interest rates is not unprecented. We have been here before, and even lower: for brief periods in the 19th century, and for several longer spells in the 20th century. The rate of inflation behaved markedly differently in the early period of the sample, before WWI, compared with the later period of the sample. Inflation moved from being volatile but zero on average, with very little persistence, to being positive on average, with higher persistence. The most obvious explanation for this is the change in monetary regime. Some version of a de-facto gold standard4 prevailed until WWI,5 while in most of the 20th century monetary policy instead targeted the exchange rate, monetary aggregates and the rate of inflation. Monetary policy in a gold standard regime is like a rigid price level target: a short bout of inflation is soon followed by a short bout of deflation, returning prices to their earlier level. Over long horizons, inflation is expected to be zero. Other monetary frameworks end up implicitly or explicitly targeting a rate of inflation6 rather than the price level, and there is no mechanism that pushes the price level down quickly after a boost, or up quickly after a fall. But the change in monetary regime seems to have done more than just change the behaviour of inflation. Real interest rates were, on average, much higher during the gold standard than during the non-gold standard era. Conversely the return on equities was lower and much more stable during the gold standard period than during the non-gold standard period. I will examine in some detail what can explain this level shift in real interest rates and equity returns between the two eras. Thereafter, I will later take a more detailed look at the last century of data, focusing on the To try and explain the different real interest rate regimes of the past, we need a theory of what drives real interest rates. Let me dispense immediately with a fairly deeply rooted, but wrong, notion in modern macroeconomics, namely that real interest rates are primarily driven by the growth rate of the economy. This relationship does not hold in the data, and it does not even hold in theory! Yet the idea persists, because of commonly adopted What follows is a brief tour of the finance theory of real interest rates. I realise it is a little terse for a central bank speech, but I want to illustrate that the misunderstanding about the strong link between real interest rates and growth does not come from bad theory, it comes from inappropriate simplification of good theory. This is actually a bit of economics and finance theory that works well, but only when applied correctly. Consider the deep foundation of most economics models, namely that people act to maximise their expected welfare, subject to a budget constraint and possibly other constraints. This is a key feature of Keynesian, New Keynesian, Classical, Neo-classical, Behavioural schools of economic thought. You can add or remove constraints, you can change how expectations are formed, but some version of this idea will be at the heart of all these models. The implication is that, in equilibrium, we can find the theoretical price of any asset as the discounted value of future payoffs. For an infinitely lived claim on a dividend stream {dt+1, dt+2, } (e.g. equities) and discount factors {Mt,t+1, Mt,t+2, } : The asset of interest to us is a risk-free one-period bond, whose price will be (the inverse of) the short-term real interest rate. With some manipulation (see appendix), it can be shown that the real interest rate is (the inverse) of the expected value of the discount factors. For example, the one-period risk free rate is the expected value of the discount factor for one period ahead: Finance people call it the stochastic discount factor. Macroeconomists call it the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution. Two ugly labels for the same intuitive concept: the real interest rate depends on how people value the future relative to today. Now, to make a link back to the macro-economy, we need to make some assumptions about what drives the stochastic discount factor, or intertemporal marginal rate of substitution. An often-used assumption is that household welfare is well-described by a time-separable utility function (you can add up welfare across periods independently) for a representative agent (you can ignore differences between people). Using these assumptions we can link the stochastic discount factor to aggregate macroeconomic variables, namely consumption. For example7 The representative agent step is already somewhat controversial. If heterogeneity across households matters, e.g. young vs old, rich vs poor, patient vs impatient, the stochastic discount factor will not just depend on aggregate macroeconomic variables, but on their entire cross-sectional distribution (of age, of wealth, of patience).8 But let s just see how far we can get with simple aggregates. To make it easier still for economists to solve their models, this highly non-linear equation is then linearised, and this is where the real trouble starts. Once linearised, what we are left with is a tight relationship between the real interest rates and growth, and nothing else. But this linearisation is hugely problematic. It kills off, mechanically, anything that might have been interesting about risk. Recall that we were trying to find what the theory says about the risk-free real interest rate. But in the linearised world, there is no risk-free real interest rate, as distinct from other interest rates. There is only THE real rate of return, and it is the same on short-term bonds, long-term bonds, equities, housing, and business capital. A simple way forward, commonly used, is to assume a lognormal distribution of consumption, which makes the non-linear model have a simple solution.9 Under such assumptions, the real interest rate depends positively on growth, but negatively on the volatility of growth. Empirically, Hartzmark (2016) shows that this volatility term is much more important than the growth term in explaining real interest rates over time. So the extended theory that includes the volatility of growth fits the data much better.10 But we want to go one step further, along the lines of Martin (2013). We do not want to restrict ourselves to lognormal distributions. We want to allow for shocks that are asymmetric, or skewed. And we want to allow for a world where extreme events occur more frequently than in a normally distributed world, i.e. the distribution has fat tails. The technical term for this is excess kurtosis. The details are in the appendix, but the key insight is that in a world that is asymmetric and fat-tailed, the entire distribution of consumption matters: the mean, the volatility, the skew (i.e. the asymmetry), the kurtosis (i.e. the fatness of the tails) and even higher moments as well.11 The intuition is straightforward. Households especially value assets that pay off when they need the income the most: when the level of consumption is low. In a riskier world of higher volatility, there are more states of the world where consumption is very low. On average, households will therefore pay more for a safe asset, which pays the same return in all states. This mechanism depresses the risk-free rate when the volatility of consumption is higher. The reasoning carries over to higher moments of the distribution. If the shocks to consumption are negatively skewed, i.e. there is a higher chance of very bad outturns than very good outturns, households will again value a safe asset more highly, depressing the risk-free real interest rate. If the shocks to consumption are fat-tailed, so that extreme outcomes happen more frequently than a lognormal distribution would imply, again that leads to a lower risk-free real interest rate. We now have a theory that says that the short-term risk-free interest rate depends (negatively) on the riskiness of the economy, as well as (positively) on growth. And we can be quite precise in saying that a riskier economy is one that has one or more of the following: a higher volatility, a more negative skew, fatter tails. So far we have used this framework to analyse the risk-free short term interest rate. We can also use this framework to analyse the rate of return on equities. Equity returns are typically high when the economy is doing well, and low when the economy does badly. That is, equities pay off least when households need it most. To compensate for this risky feature of equities, average equity returns tend to be higher than returns on risk-free bonds. The difference between equity returns and risk-free returns is called the equity risk premium. The theory says that, the riskier the economy (higher volatility, more negative skew, fatter fails), the higher the equity risk premium (see Martin (2013)). Armed with our theoretical framework that risk-free rates depend negatively on risk, and that the equity risk premium depends positively on risk, we return to the data. Table 1 summarises various properties of the data, split into the gold standard and non- gold standard regimes.12 The point I want to draw your attention to first is that real interest rates were, on average, 3.5% in the gold standard regime, much higher than the average of 1.6% in the non-gold standard regime (from which we also exclude the two world wars). Now note the growth rates of consumption13 in the economy: 0.8% before, 2% after. Clearly, an interest rate theory based on growth alone fails spectacularly here because it goes the wrong way. This failure of the notion that interest rates are determined by growth has also been documented by Hamilton et al. (2016) and Hartzmark (2016), who show that the correlation between real interest rates and growth over time is usually insignificant and often has the wrong sign. But that is just a property of the overly simplified theory. The full theory of interest rates says that it should depend on risk, as measured by volatility, asymmetry and fat tails, as well as on average growth. The volatility of consumption growth rose only slightly from the gold standard period to the non-gold standard period, to 2.3% from 1.7%. But the asymmetry and the fatness of the tails moved quite drastically. Consumption growth became strongly negatively skewed in the later period, with a skew of -1.3, from a near-zero skew of -0.2 in the earlier period. And consumption growth became much more fat-tailed, with a kurtosis of 8 in the later period, up from kurtosis of 2.4.14 To illustrate this same point, figure 2 shows a graph of the distribution of growth in the two periods: in the later period (in red), the distribution shifted to the right (higher average growth), but became more asymmetric (a higher chance of very low outcomes) and more fat-tailed. So in the 20th century, economic dynamics became more negatively skewed, with more frequent outturns very far from average. These are risk characteristics that theory indeed predicts should lead to a lower real interest rate, but also to a higher equity risk premium. In the gold standard period, real equity returns were 3.6%, roughly equal to the risk-free rate, so the equity risk premium was zero. In the non-gold standard period, real equity returns were 6.9% with a real risk-free rate of 1.6%, so an average equity risk premium of 5.2%. Note that the theory does not just explain the direction of the changes in risk-free rates and equity returns, it can match the magnitude as well. Using a quantitative model15 outlined in the appendix, we feed in a series of parameters that determine the volatility, skew and kurtosis of consumption growth to match the gold standard era data. For plausible parameters the model generates a 3% risk-free real rate and near 0% equity risk premium in this period, as shown in Table 2. We then change the parameters to match the post-WWI mean, volatility, skew and kurtosis of consumption growth and see how large a change in the risk-free rate and equity risk premium the model predicts. It turns out we can account for almost all of the drop in the risk-free rate and almost all of the rise in the equity risk premium, again shown in Table 2.16 Our model predicts a post-gold standard real rate of 1.8%, and an equity risk premium of 6.7%.17 So far we have explained the large change in gold standard era vs non-gold standard era interest rates and equity returns. But the non-gold standard era is not well-described as a single low-interest rate regime. The period contains multiple regimes, to which I now turn. I apply a regime-switching framework to the data.18 This is a statistical model that tries to identify regimes of high, medium and low interest rates, and allows for different levels of volatility. Our regime classification method identifies four low interest rate regimes in the post-WWI period: the late 1910s, the 1930-40s, the 1970s and the current post-financial crisis period, as shown in figure 3. The first three of these periods followed a change in the monetary regime.19 After the monetary regime change, the late 1910s and 1970s were associated with a period of very high inflation (see figure 1). During 1930-40s inflation was less high, but nevertheless higher than today or the gold standard period, and very volatile. In the 1910s and 1970s nominal interest rates were relatively high, while during the 1930-40s nominal rates were closer to zero, as they have been in the most recent decade. We can therefore say that the current low interest rate regime is unlike the others in that it did not follow a monetary regime change and has been characterised by low and stable inflation by historical standards, but otherwise most similar to the 1930-40s in that both featured near-zero nominal interest rates. As I mentioned in an earlier speech (Vlieghe (2016a)), in the 1930s some economists also worried about debt deleveraging and demographics, in a close parallel to today. To fully account for each of the shorter low interest rate regimes, ideally we would like a measure of the expected volatility, expected skew and expected kurtosis of GDP year by year, but we do not have sufficient data or sufficiently powerful statistical techniques to identify these expectations. Such techniques only lend themselves to analysing the big break in real interest rates between the gold standard and non-gold standard period. But we can still use the general insight that risk-free rates are pushed down by the riskiness of the economy. Each of the four low interest rate regimes in the post WWI period featured either a monetary regime change, a war, a financial crisis20 or some combination thereof, all of which plausibly involve a material increase in risk, and often lower growth as well. One further episode that I would like to highlight is the 1980s, as it is insufficiently appreciated to what extent this period was unusual, in real interest rate history terms.21 The loss of a monetary anchor after the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in 1971, pent up inflation pressure with inadequate monetary tightening, and a spike in the price of oil in 1973 led to persistently high inflation in the 1970s, which was largely unanticipated, meaning real rates in the 1970s were lower than if inflation had been as expected. In the 1980s, control over inflation was regained as nominal interest rates moved sharply higher. Inflation expectations, and inflation itself, moved back down only slowly. The slow adjustment of inflation expectations meant that real interest rates were required to be unusually high for an unusually long period22, to limit growth and allow spare capacity to drag down inflation and inflation expectations to desired lower levels.23 Real interest rates in the 1980s were higher and more persistent than at any time since the UK s attempt to resume its gold peg in the 1925-1931 period. Real interest rates only started coming down in the late 1980s when inflation credibility of central banks became more firmly established, a process that continued into the 1990s, helped by the creation of inflation I have shown that finance theory can account for the high real interest rates of the gold standard and the low real interest rates of the non-gold standard era, based on the difference in the behaviour of the macroeconomy in the two periods. The theoretical explanation is an increase in the riskiness of the economy, with a more negative skew and fatter tails of growth outturns playing an important role. Somewhat speculatively, I would like to dig one level deeper still, and ask what fundamental drivers can explain the fact that growth has become more negatively skewed and tails have become fatter? The World Wars were obviously two significant events that were both negative and far from the average, but I have shown that the change in the measured riskiness of the economy took place even in a sample where the wars are excluded. A good candidate explanation, in my view, is the rising importance of debt and financial intermediation. Empirically, Jorda et al. (2013) have shown that booms associated with a more rapid private sector debt expansion are more frequently followed by financial crises, which tend to involve larger contractions in GDP than normal recessions. An increased frequency of very bad outturns is exactly what would generate a more negative skew and fatter tails in growth.24 The theoretical mechanism driving the link between debt and a more negative skew and fatter tails has been present in macroeconomic models of debt and leverage for many years. The basic insight from models where debt matters25 is that increased debt and a larger financial sector brings the economy closer to an efficient allocation of resources, but also makes the economy more vulnerable to shocks. Higher leverage and a larger financial intermediation sector mean that a downturn can become amplified as reduced borrower net worth (final borrowers or financial intermediaries) causes a contraction in asset prices, which reduces net worth further, leading to a downward spiral of falling asset prices, falling borrowing capacity, falling lending capacity, falling spending. The mechanism is less powerful on the upside: if the economy is already close to an efficient allocation of resources, borrowing and lending constraints do not bite, and the scope for a large further boom is limited. The asymmetry and fat tails of growth outturns therefore follow logically from that framework.26 Figure 4 and 5 show that the ratio of credit27 to household income was low and stable during the gold standard period, but became larger and more volatile in the post-gold standard period, consistent with these theories of the impact of credit and financial intermediation.28 The fact that the rise in the importance of credit and financial intermediation occurred at the start of the 20th century is probably not a coincidence. The end of the gold standard plausibly contributed to this process, as it allowed for the supply of money and credit to be decoupled from a fixed gold supply, bringing huge benefits in terms of growth and more efficient allocation of resources, but costs in terms of fragility. Specifically, figure 5 shows that, within the generally low real interest rate regime of the non-gold standard era, regimes of persistent negative real interest rates coincided with contractions in the ratio of credit to income, in other words deleveraging. This deleveraging mechanism was one of the three factors (debt, demographics, distribution of income) that I highlighted earlier as a key driver for low real interest rates.29 ###newline###  The link from low equilibrium rates to deleveraging brings me to the current policy outlook. Figure 6 is a more up-to-date and comprehensive measure of the ratio of credit to GDP.30 It shows that the period of deleveraging that started in 2010 might be coming to an end. For most of the subdued economic recovery since 2010, credit growth has been below income growth. Households and firms were repairing their balance sheets. As I have discussed previously (Vlieghe (2016a)), this was a welcome process of repair, but one that should be expected to weigh on growth. The desire to reduce the debt burden translates into reduced spending by those sectors with the highest debt. But over the past year or so that process of balance sheet repair seems to have come to an end, or at least to a pause. That potentially says something important about the equilibrium real interest rate. Households and firms, by their actions, are showing us that they have reached their desired debt to income ratios for now, and do not wish to deleverage further. That also means that the deleveraging process is no longer weighing on demand as much as it was previously. In turn, that suggests that the equilibrium real interest rate might be rising slightly from the very low levels in the post-crisis period. Deleveraging is not the only factor driving the equilibrium interest rate. Other medium-term dynamics, such as demographics and the income distribution, do not show any signs of turning. And, as I have argued in this speech, even if the equilibrium interest rate is moving up, it is only moving up within a framework of a lower average real interest rate in the post gold standard era. The high real interest rates of the 1980s remain an outlier, the drivers of which are not applicable at all today. While these medium-term considerations form an important backdrop to my thinking about Bank Rate now and in the medium term, they are not enough to guide actual meeting-by-meeting interest rate decisions. Those decisions require significant further analysis of recent developments in the UK economy: growth, slack, inflation. Until recently, I thought the appropriate response of monetary policy was to be patient, given modest growth and subdued underlying inflationary pressure. But the evolution of the data is increasingly suggesting that we are approaching the moment when Bank Rate may need to rise. First, despite a clear weakening of GDP growth in the first half of this year, the amount of economic slack continues to be eroded. Employment growth has re-accelerated after slowing late last year, and the unemployment rate keeps making new lows, reaching 4.3% on the most recent data, down from 4.9% a year ago. Wage growth is not as weak as it was earlier in the year: over the past 5 months, annualised growth in private sector pay31 has averaged just over 3%. And some pay-related surveys also suggest a modest rise in wage pressure in recent months. If these near-term labour market trends continue, I would expect this to lead to somewhat more upward pressure on medium-term inflation. Second, consumption growth generally held up better than I expected over the past year. Consumption did slow earlier this year, partly in response to weaker real income growth, as wage growth has not kept up with the exchange-rate-driven, temporary, rise in inflation. Consumption growth in Q2 was particularly weak. But there are some early signs of stronger consumption growth in Q3. Whether that improvement will last is still an open question. Rising real wage growth, both due to improving nominal wage growth and the expected easing back of inflation, would support consumption growth further out. An easing of the rate of growth of consumer credit following some tentative signs of a modest tightening in credit conditions is likely to act as a slight drag. The wider economic backdrop over the past year has been one of improving global growth, and in particular an improving outlook for Eurozone growth, which generally benefits UK external demand. But, acting in the other direction, is the continued uncertainty about the UK s future trading relations with the EU and the rest of the world. That uncertainty is likely to be dampening investment growth at the moment as firms put some projects on hold pending further clarity. There remains a risk that, at some stage, the uncertainty surrounding the Brexit process has a larger impact on the economy than we have seen so far. If that happens, monetary policy would respond appropriately. But for now, it seems the net effect of the many underlying forces acting on the UK economy is that slack is continually being eroded and wage pressure is gently building. If these data trends of reducing slack, rising pay pressure, strengthening household spending and robust global growth continue, the appropriate time for a rise in Bank Rate might be as early as in the coming months. Notes: The figure shows the kernel density estimates for the UK consumption per capita growth. The Gold Standard sample contains the years 1831-1913 and 1925-1931, while the non-Gold Standard sample contains the years 1914-1924 and 1932-2016. Notes: The low real rate regime is defined by the Markov Switching Model in Section 5. Notes: The low real rate regime is defined by the Markov Switching Model in Section 5. Secured lending measure excludes impact of securitizations Notes: The low real rate regime is defined by the Markov Switching Model in Section 5. Secured lending measure excludes impact of securitizations Note: *All liabilities of the household and not-for-profit sector (ex. unfunded pensions, derivatives), and private non-financial corporations  (PNFCs') loans and debt securities Note: The appendix shows that the precise choice of sample dates for the GS and non-GS periods is not important for the stylised facts we aim to match to theory - the level of real rate and equity premia and the growth rate, volatility, skewness and kurtosis of (consumption) growth rates. ###newline###  Note: Model calibration only changes the parameters for the consumption process (mean and volatility of Gaussian term and arrival intensity of jumps and mean and volatility of jump sizes), the preference parameters (risk aversion of 6, time discount of 0.025 and intertemporal elasticity of substitution of 2) are kept fixed for both periods.