 I would like to thank Alina Barnett and Adrian Chiu for research assistance and I am also grateful for helpful comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. Some years ago, when in my last job, I conducted a small survey of investors. It was about central bank communication. Most of the questions involved how this should be done, but I also asked about the amount of it   is it possible for central bankers to talk too much? Given markets  apparently insatiable appetite for information, I d expected the answer to be a firm  no . I was therefore surprised when almost % of respondents said  yes .  Sometimes , one of them wrote,  these people should just shut up . Undeterred, here I am for my first speech. I comfort myself that there is more to talk about these days. That survey was conducted in early , after a long period of steady and undisturbed growth in the developed economies. We thought we d answered most of the big questions about macroeconomic policy. After four years of extraordinary economic volatility, the Great Moderation (as it s now known) seems a distant dream. And if we thought then that there was little for macroeconomists any longer to talk about, now it s hard to know where to begin. I have chosen today to talk about the exchange rate   specifically, the causes and consequences of sterling s depreciation in  and . Any exchange rate is a relative price   it depends on differences between countries. This means I will put to one side much of what has affected the UK in recent years: the boom and bust in banks  balance sheets and the huge swings in commodity prices (generally upwards) have all been global events, at least among the developed economies. You can see in Chart , which plots rolling correlations between output and domestic demand growth in the UK and their equivalents in the rest of the OECD, that the past few years have seen a very high degree of co-movement. Whatever these common trends, however, differences between economies have also been big enough to warrant some significant moves in exchange rates, including the UK s. Between  and , sterling s effective exchange rate fell by %, the largest two-year decline since the devaluation of  (Chart  plots daily data, which go back to ). First, the main cause of sterling s decline isn t monetary but real. Specifically, it reflects the need to rebalance UK supply   away from non-traded goods and services, and towards the production of tradables   in order to match an equivalent shift in the composition of demand. Over a number of years, and via a strong exchange rate, strong growth in that demand had  crowded out  the traded sector. As prospects weakened and I will make the point that the vulnerability of the public finances is particularly important in this respect Second, the scale of the exchange-rate adjustment required for rebalancing depends centrally on how easy it is to move resources from one area of the economy to another. The point of it is to make the production of non-tradables less profitable, that of tradables more so: it is the economy s way of pushing supply in the right direction. That incentive doesn t need to be very strong if capital is mobile. But if   say   a dysfunctional financial system makes it harder to shift resources from low-return to high-return businesses, the required decline in the real exchange rate will be correspondingly larger.  And during the transition, labour productivity, national income and the share of it paid out as wages will all be lower than they otherwise would have been. Slow rebalancing, slow productivity growth and the scale of the depreciation may therefore be interrelated. Third, though real (relative price) shocks needn t have any impact on aggregate inflation, rigidly sticking to the inflation target through this period would have involved significant economic costs, costs that the MPC s remit explicitly tells it to avoid. Given the scale of the adjustment going on underneath, stabilising the aggregate CPI would have required outright declines in prices of many non-tradables and, because their production is labour-intensive, declines in nominal wages as well. This in turn would probably have meant much higher unemployment. What the MPC has effectively done, therefore, is to employ the flexibility in its remit to accommodate part of this shock as a higher aggregate price level. And although these first-round effects have been significant and uncomfortable, contributing to a prolonged period of above-target inflation, it s hard to detect any real sign of second-round effects on either wage growth or medium-term expectations of inflation. With the relative price adjustment now largely complete, that is very reassuring. Let me go through these arguments in more detail. I will then draw some more general conclusions and say something about where we are today. ###newline###  Not really. The problem with this interpretation is that sneaky phrase  all else equal . This is a useful device to imagine what would happen in response to an arbitrary change in interest rates. But, in practice, policy generally changes for a reason: it reacts to things in order to offset their impact on medium-term inflation. And the events that drive policy may themselves, quite independently, influence the exchange rate. Almost invariably, all else is not equal. But if you can t use interest rates themselves, how do you identify independent monetary policy events? I think one way to do it, at least in an inflation targeting framework, is to look at breakeven inflation rates in the bond market. It is the job of policy to keep inflation on target over the medium term. So if short rates change but forward inflation rates do not, it s reasonable to infer likely that policy is probably reacting  endogenously  to something else. Conversely, shifts in forward inflation rates can be interpreted as  exogenous  changes in the stance of policy, at least in the eyes of the gilts market. Chart  demonstrates what happens when you pass the exchange rate through this filter. It plots the rolling correlation, over four-year periods, between daily changes in the sterling trade-weighted index and in -year forward inflation rates (on the assumption that monetary policy takes that long to have its full effect on inflation). Identifying pure changes in monetary policy is a longstanding and thorny problem in economics and I certainly don t want to pretend that using forward inflation either solves the problem, or gets any closer to doing so that the many other solutions that have emerged over the years. Its most obvious flaw is that bond markets can be wrong. RPI inflation in the first half of this year was .%, bp higher than the market had projected three years earlier. Most forecasts of CPI inflation, including the MPC s, turned out just as wrong. So isn t it possible that monetary policy in  and  was, in fact, too loose, and that the fx market was simply the first to register the fact? I will discuss the recent behaviour of inflation later on. But let me just make a couple of points here. First, much of that surprise reflects subsequent, and unforeseen, factors such as the jump in commodity prices and the increase in the headline rate of VAT. They directly contributed around % points to inflation (whether CPI or RPI) during the first half of this year. Second, it requires a pretty perverse view of financial markets to imagine that fx traders should take one view of inflation, their colleagues on bond desks, sitting only a few feet away, another one entirely. In fact, it seems wholly implausible. What seems much more likely is that, if monetary policy were loosened significantly, independently of anything else, you would see sell-offs not just in the currency but in ###newline###  Another way of looking at this is Chart . It plots the expected real exchange rate against the US dollar and the Euro (i.e. the nominal rate adjusted for cross-country differences in forward inflation) five years forward. What it says   assuming that currency and inflation markets are, in fact, consistent with each other   is that sterling fell not because markets expected higher inflation in the UK, but because they judged that the relative value of UK output itself (the real exchange rate) would have to decline. Furthermore, it would have to do so at horizons well beyond those at which monetary policy is generally thought to have any impact on the real economy. Why was that? The real exchange rate tells you how much foreign output you get in return for one unit of UK output. It s useful (and conventional) to split this relative price into two others: the price of the UK s tradable output compared with that of our trading partners (the  terms of trade ) and the relative price of non-traded to traded output. Any sustainable move in the real exchange rate has to arise from a change in one or both these sources. In the UK, at least, the first is not an important source of variation. The terms of trade move around, but not by enough to have had much bearing on the real exchange rate (Chart ). One reason for markets  pessimism about domestic demand was the perception that the UK private sector is over-indebted. My own belief is that some of this was (and still is) overdone. But there are clearly areas of private-sector spending   most obviously residential investment   that had been growing strongly, relied predominantly on domestic suppliers and were financed largely by debt. When the supply of mortgage credit started to contract in late , residential investment did so too, and by more than in the Eurozone. This must have contributed to sterling s decline. What I think was more significant, however, was the vulnerability of the public finances to the financial crisis. First, almost all government consumption (current spending on public services) goes on non-tradables. Public services are themselves non-tradable (you can t consume them except in the UK). And although the public sector buys some things that are bought and sold on international markets, the vast bulk of their expenditure, over % of it, goes on things that are produced only domestically. This is why, in international data, there is a strong and well-established correlation between the real exchange rate and the share of government consumption in GDP. A recent IMF study, for example, found that a %-of-GDP increase in government consumption led (all else equal) to a % increase in a country s real exchange rate. Second, the UK s public finances were particularly exposed to the financial crisis. This is partly because Britain has very large banks. These generated a rising share of tax revenue in the years leading up to the crisis. When the crisis came, banks  balance sheets   particularly their substantial overseas assets   also represented a significant potential liability for the UK taxpayer. ###newline###  Demand is only half the story. As you can see from Chart b, the decline in the equilibrium real exchange rate depends not just on the shift in the demand curve but also on the slope of the supply curve. This, in turn, is a reflection of how easy it is to move resources from one sector to another   how easy it is to  crowd in  the tradables sector. What does this mean in the real world? You can think of the depreciation, in this context, as an incentive device. It increases the return on capital in the traded sector and reduces it in the non-traded sector: it s the economy s way of ensuring that supply adapts to the shift in relative demand. If that process is straightforward   if factors are relatively mobile   the supply curve is flatter. You don t need much of a nudge from the exchange rate. As the rebalancing takes place, the rates of return in the two sectors re-converge. But if there are significant obstacles to factor mobility (if it s hard to shut down businesses in one sector and grow them in another) the incentive has to be that much bigger. The slope of the supply curve, and (for any given shift in demand) the decline in the exchange rate, are both larger. And as long as the rebalancing is impeded in this way, in which case capital remains misallocated, productivity, national income and the share of it paid out as wages (as opposed to capital income) will all be lower than they otherwise would be. I think this captures some of what we re going through now. We know that productivity growth tends to be slow in the aftermath of financial crises, and the UK economy today certainly fits that pattern: output per hour has risen at an annualised rate of only .% since the end of the recession, far lower than the .% average during other post-war recoveries. We also have compelling theoretical models that explain why a dysfunctional banking system, or other frictions in factor markets, can slow down the usual Schumpeterian process of  creative destruction , i.e. the replacement of unprofitable activities by those that are newly profitable. All I m suggesting here is that, if this is true, then the most obvious example in the UK would be the failure to re-allocate resources from the non-traded to the tradable sector. There is a connection between slow productivity growth and slow rebalancing. This is mostly conjecture. Nor am I pretending that there aren t other things   most obviously slow growth in the UK s trading partners   that have held up rebalancing. But I will offer a couple of bits of supporting evidence for this supply-side story. Chart  plots estimates of gross margins in the consumer-facing sector (largely non-tradables) and the rest of the private economy (which has a much greater share of tradables). It shows a significant divergence between the two, suggesting a similar divergence in their rates of return. Chart  shows that, despite this dispersion, and despite the depth of the recession, rates of start-ups and corporate bankruptcies have both been relatively low. Anyway, if this is true, it suggests that rebalancing and overall productivity growth will remain sluggish for as long as the banking system itself is in poor health. It also implies that, at least for given trends on the demand side, sterling s real exchange rate will have to remain weak for some time to come. ###newline###  I ve argued so far that, despite the coincidence with falling interest rates, sterling s dramatic depreciation in  was driven not by monetary but by real forces. At a stroke, the financial crisis exposed the UK to the troubled assets of its large banks. More significantly, it reduced national income   above all government revenue   by more than in other countries. This meant that demand for UK (non-traded) output, and therefore its relative price, were bound to decline, that much more so in the presence of a sclerotic banking system that is finding it hard to reallocate capital. But why should this have anything to do with inflation? All this would occur even in a world with full market clearing and no spare resources (Charts ). In any event, this is a shock to relative prices. There s no necessary reason why there should be any implications for aggregate inflation. The UK has a floating exchange rate and monetary independence. It can, over any reasonable period of time, choose its own inflation rate. Relative prices change all the time, even when overall CPI inflation is stable   so why was this one inflationary? The difference in this case, I believe, is one of scale. To have stuck rigidly to the inflation target, while a relative price adjustment this large was taking place, would have required a sizeable drop in the price of non-traded output not just in relative terms but in absolute terms as well. Because the non-traded sector is labour-intensive that, in turn, would probably have meant a decline in nominal wages and, in order to produce it, a significant increase in unemployment. This is especially true if (as the evidence suggests) the Phillips curve flattens out at low levels of wage inflation. In other words, the MPC could have kept inflation closer to target through this period (the impact on inflation was not unavoidable). It s just that doing so would have meant an unacceptably high cost in foregone output and employment. Instead, and in order to prevent nominal wages from falling, a part of the relative price adjustment was allowed to feed through to aggregate prices. This hasn t been without risk. High spot inflation increases the chances of  second-round  effects on inflation expectations. Price-setters in the private economy might begin to assume that this new, higher rate of inflation is the new norm. That s why, at various points over the past year or so, some MPC members have voted for a small rise in interest rates. But there are three important things to bear in mind. First, it is not the job of the MPC   or, for that matter, any inflation-targeting monetary authority   to keep inflation on target at all times, come what may.  There is clearly room for interpretation as to what it means in practice, but the MPC s remit states explicitly that it would be  neither possible nor desirable  to keep CPI inflation at % at all times and that the aim is instead to  bring inflation back to target within a reasonable period of time without creating undue instability in the economy . Second, inflation expectations have actually remained pretty well anchored over the past three years. Longer-term survey measures are close to their historic averages. Though there are plenty of other reasons why this is true, private-sector pay settlements are below average. The MPC will have to remain vigilant for such effects. But I see little evidence that, so far at least, high spot inflation has materially dented confidence in the inflation target over the medium term.   With the relative price change now largely complete, that is very reassuring. Third, and most importantly for policy today, the international environment is clearly disinflationary. The  common factors  I referred to earlier   slow growth in the United States, the sovereign debt crisis in the Eurozone and its knock-on effects on the cost of finance for UK and European banks   all threaten a further tightening in retail credit and a further slowing in domestic activity. Indeed, these effects are already visible and, over the medium term, look set to dominate any remaining  pass-through  from sterling s depreciation to domestic inflation. There are clearly other policies   above all in the Eurozone   that would forestall some of these things, and do so more effectively than UK monetary policy alone could ever hope to. But that doesn t mean either that UK monetary policy is powerless or that it doesn t have its own role to play. ###newline###  It s clear that such international tensions exist. But at least as far as sterling s depreciation is concerned, the military analogies are overdone. For one thing, the currency weakened but the bond market did not. So if one leg was duck-like, the other certainly wasn t. Second (forgive the over-extension of the duck metaphor) much of the subsequent quacking came from other sources, notably commodities and indirect taxes. Third, we have good reason   the need to rebalance supply, following an inescapable, crisis-induced rebalancing of demand   to believe what the financial markets told us at the time, namely that sterling s depreciation was primarily the result of a decline in the equilibrium real exchange rate.  A dysfunctional banking system, or any other impediment to the reallocation of supply, can only have amplified that decline. That doesn t tell the whole story. Some of the inflation   and also the depreciation   probably have been the result of a de facto accommodation on the part of monetary policy. That s because sticking rigidly to the inflation target would have meant a much larger rise in unemployment, and the remit of the UK MPC, like that of other inflation targeters, rightly avoids that prescription. In the meantime, medium-term inflation expectations have remained broadly stable. I think there are some longer-term lessons to be drawn from this. One is that the credibility of the UK s inflation-targeting regime looks reasonably robust. That s clearly not something that can, or should, be taken for granted. Credibility is earned, over time, by keeping inflation close to its target.  But it is striking how stable both pay growth and medium-term inflation expectations have been in the face of these relatively large swings in spot inflation. Second, however, even credible monetary policy has its limits. The long rise in commodity prices, the financial crisis and the sluggish rebalancing of supply have all acted to reduce real household incomes. It matters to some degree whether this occurs via higher inflation or lower nominal wages, because the latter route would probably have involved higher unemployment, if only for a time. Credibility means monetary policy can, within limits, choose the former course. But the hit to real incomes would have occurred either way. Finally, having acknowledged at the start that monetary policy makers are often thought to talk too much, I fear I have done precisely that.