 It is a great pleasure to be here today to deliver the second Bernard Corry Memorial lecture. Bernard was my  mentor, friend  and inspiration and I  miss him greatly.  I guess he was the first one to really have believed in me and I think he would have been amused that one of his boys now has an office on Threadneedle Street. I remember, all those years ago, many hours spent discussing Bernard's passion for Economics. Perhaps the biggest thing Bernard ever taught me was to try and understand the low-side risk of any policy prescription, by which I mean always worry about the consequences if you are wrong. I remember him telling me on numerous occasions that I should be concerned about the welfare of the man on the Clapham omnibus. In part this was to ensure that economists did no harm, and also because Bernard never forgot his   East End roots and understood that this bus passenger was paying his salary.  Good empirical evidence tells its story regardless of the precise way in which it is analyzed. In large part it is its simplicity that makes it persuasive. Physicists do not compete to find more elaborate ways to observe falling apples.  Instead they have made progress because theory  has sought inspiration from a wide range of empirical phenomena. Macroeconomics could progress in the same way. But progress is unlikely as long as macroeconomists require the armor of a stochastic  pseudo- world before doing battle with evidence from the real one.  (Summers, 1991, p. 146) ###newline###  There has been a significant improvement in the level of unemployment prevailing in the UK not just since 1997, but considerably earlier (Chart 1).  The most notable feature of   the immediate post-war era was of low rates of unemployment   which averaged 2.5% from 1945-1975. This situation reversed itself at the end of the 1970s when the unemployment rate rose from 5.3% in June 1979 to 11.9% in June 1984. The unemployment rate declined to 6.9% in June 1990, then increased to a new peak rate of 9.4% in September 1994, and subsequently declined again until September 2005 to 4.7%. Table 1 sets out the major changes in the composition of the UK labour force for the  period 1997-2007Q1. Most notable is the decline in unemployment, with 300,000 fewer jobless individuals in 2007Q1 than in 1997. Employment increased by more than 2.5 million over the same period. The unemployment rate thus fell from 7.2% to  5.5% between these years, while both the employment and activity rates rose. A decline in the unemployment rate has by no means been restricted to the UK: in  the  past decade, unemployment rates around the OECD have been lower than in the previous decade (Blanchflower 2007). This would suggest that part of the explanation for the improvement in UK unemployment could have been the result of global factors. Despite claims to the contrary in the OECD Jobs Study and by Layard, Nickell and Jackman (1998) in their unemployment book and elsewhere, rates of unemployment over time by country show little or no statistical association with conventional measures of institutions and policies (Baker et al, 2005). There is also scant association with the deregulations of the 1990s and trends in unemployment. Despite conventional wisdom  high  unemployment does not seem to be primarily the result of job protection, labour taxes, trade union power or wage inflexibility (Blanchflower, 2001). By contrast,  product market, capital market and housing market reforms all seem significant in explaining falling unemployment. However, the most important factors behind the decline in UK unemployment were probably welfare reforms involving reductions in the replacement  rate along with tightening of benefit rules (Nickell, 2006). individuals leaving the labour market have been women, with the largest group women over retirement age. This looks to me like discouraged workers unable to find work in a loosening labour market. Of course, one quarter does not necessarily indicate a trend, but we should always be on the lookout for significant changes in the data, of which this may be a prelude. The increase in inactivity by age in 2007Q1 was as follows. In addition, worryingly, the proportion of total unemployment accounted  for by those  aged under 24 has ticked up over time. For example, in 1997 18-24 year olds constituted 23.9% of the unemployed compared with 30.4% in January-March  2007.  Indeed,  Quintini et al (2007) have noted that over the period 1995-2005 the UK had the largest increase in the ratio of youth to adult unemployment rates in the OECD (Chart 2); the UK moved from having a ratio below the OECD average in 1995 to being well above it in 2005.2 There is no good explanation for the increase in youth unemployment, however (Blanchflower et al. 2007). It does not appear that young workers have been crowded out by immigrants, nor older workers returning to the workplace. My Masters thesis, which Bernard examined twenty-odd years ago, was on the causes    and consequences of youth unemployment, and it appears that the same issues remain pertinent today. ###newline###  Self-employment as a proportion of the UK workforce is high by international standards (Blanchflower, 2000, 2005). Chart 3  shows that  self-employment rose from around 7%  in the late 1970s, peaking at 14.0% in 1991, before easing back slightly during the late 1990s to below 12.0%, and then recovering again. What explains these patterns? It is apparent from Chart 3 that the largest increase in the self-employment rate  was  during the 1980s. During this decade several factors appear to have combined to push the number of self-employed workers higher. First, there was a shift towards service sector industries, which one might assume have lower barriers to entry than manufacturing. Second, the decade was noteworthy for the extent of financial liberalisation that occurred. Loosening liquidity constraints tend to provide a boost to self employment (Blanchflower and Oswald, (1998); Blanchflower, Levine and Zimmerman, (2002)). This enabled many latent entrepreneurs access to credit markets, which were previously closed to them. The increased availability of credit also facilitated a house price boom,  which subsequently allowed homeowners to extract equity with which to invest in their own businesses. Black et al (1996), for example, found that a 10% rise in the value of housing equity increased the number of new firm VAT registrations in the UK by some 5%.   Taylor (2004) found that increases in house prices raised the probability of self- employment entry. Third, government policy was introduced that actively encouraged workers to become self-employed. An example of these policies was the Enterprise Allowance  Scheme (EAS), which ran from 1983 to 1991, paying self-employed workers a supplementary weekly income (of around  40 a week) for up to 12 months. In the twelve months following the scheme s introduction, self-employment rose by +266,000, the largest recorded annual increase of the past 40 years.  Campbell and Daly (1992) estimate that  one in eight of those that became self-employed during the late 1980s were supported    into employment through this scheme. The subsequent decline in the self-employment rate observed from 1995 resulted from a shift in a large number of workers from self-employment to employment within the construction industry. This reflected work by the Inland Revenue to stop employers treating employees as self-employed workers in order to avoid paying NIC s, nor provide benefits, training or observe employment protection laws. While the total number of workers employed in the construction industry remained steady at just over 18 million between 1995 and 2000, the proportion of workers declaring themselves to be self- employed fell from 46% to 33%. By 1997, 200,000 construction workers had reclassified themselves as employees, explaining most of the reduction in self-employment in construction between 1995 and 1997. In the year September 2002 to September 2003 the number of self-employed increased by 280,000. The largest increase of 120,000 was found in banking, finance and insurance   and was dominated by the 35-49 age group, although there were also large increases in   the 50-64/59 and 65/60 and over age groups. During this period a number of tax changes were implemented, including: reform of capital gains tax; reducing the rate of corporation tax on smaller companies; the introduction of stakeholder pensions; and the abolition of Advance Corporation Tax. Over the past couple of years there has been further substantial growth in the numbers of self-employed as well as in the self-employment rate. The numbers  of  self-employed  over the period 2005Q1 to 2007Q1 increased by 217,000, accounting for a remarkable 71.1% of the total growth of employment of 305,000 over the period. Moreover, only 37.6% of the additional employee jobs were full-time compared with 61.8% of self- employed jobs. In addition, over the most recent quarter, January-March 2007,  the  number of employees fell by 100,000 while the number of self-employed grew by 45,000. At this time it is by no means obvious why self-employment has increased so sharply in recent months. In part it is because of increased immigration   since immigrants have a higher propensity to be self-employed   alongside moves to self-employment from some older workers who had previously been out of the labour force (Blanchflower and Shadforth, 2007). The rise in self-employment in part likely reflects the lack of employee jobs in a loose labour market. It does not appear that the most recent increase in self-employment (i.e. over the past two years) has been the result of changes in regulation, tax changes or changes in the  minimum wage. It seems unlikely that the current rate of growth in self-employment is sustainable in the long-run. ###newline###  My reading of the labour data is that  the market has  loosened over the past year or so.  The other sort of capacity constraint faced by firms reflects how hard they have to work their incumbent factors of production to meet demand   i.e. capacity constraints within firms. The sum of capacity within firms and in the labour market is usually called the output gap. means, over and above the skilled labour shortages that have been highlighted by the Bank s Agents in their recent surveys. New computers can be bought in an hour; equipment can be rented and work can be farmed out to consultants or sub-contractors.  The availability of the internet and fast communications means that workers can work  from home if necessary. So, what precisely are the constraints on firms that supposedly  are binding in services? I m not sure. Nevertheless, signs of limited spare capacity may be a concern if they prelude price increases. There is tentative evidence from a number of surveys that some firms have become more confident about pushing through price increases. This may reflect buoyant expectations regarding future demand or simply a delayed pass-through of higher input prices. But the evidence is mixed. For example, the CBI  measure  of manufacturing  firms  expected price increases over the next three months was above its 2006 average in 2007Q1, but the comparable BCC measure had declined. Furthermore, the surveys have little predictive power for actual output price increases one-year ahead; the correlation coefficient for CBI expected prices and output prices 12-months later is 0.56, while the coefficient using BCC expected prices is just 0.09.4  As such, it is difficult to interpret  what the data are actually telling us about future inflationary pressures at  present,  although they do seem to point to an upside risk. It is hard to reconcile the recent increases in unemployment and inactivity with what is happening within firms. The evidence would seem to support the observed  steady  increase in labour productivity since 2005, which suggests that firms have been working their workforce and plant more intensively. Strictly, we would expect such an increase in capacity utilisation to result in a tightening of the labour market, and increased pay pressures. Since that has not occurred, I must presume that the weakness in the labour market (however caused) has more than offset the increased constraints within firms. ###newline###  Consistent with the finding of a loose labour market and  increased self-employment,  wage growth has been flat or slowing on most measures since late 2004, as indicated in Chart 6. The Average Earnings Index and Average Weekly Earnings series excluding bonuses have shown little or no tendency to increase; if anything they have declined slightly over the past twelve months or so. Earnings excluding bonuses, averaged over three months, rose by 3.7% in the year to March 2007, compared with 3.9% in March  2006 and 4.1% in March 2005. In contrast, average earnings including bonuses increased at an annual rate of 4.5% in March 2007, compared with 4.0% in 2006 and 4.5% in 2005.  However, the pick-up in  this headline series is confined to the financial services sector. Contrary to the claims of some that bonuses are volatile and should be smoothed through there are much stronger arguments for actually ignoring them entirely as long as they are based on performance and especially so if they are derived from some market risk (see Weitzman (1984) and Blanchflower and Oswald (1987, 1998)); for example, an increase in basic pay of  1,000 this year would add to household income in all future years, and has quite different implications from a one-off bonus of  1,000. In any case, the estimates derived both with and without bonuses are likely to be upward biased estimates of wages. The data files used, by definition, exclude the earnings of the self-employed, which, as discussed above, account for 13% of total employment.  The  files also exclude data from workers in the smallest workplaces, which account for a further 13% or so of the workforce. The wages of these workers are more flexible than other workers in the economy when labour markets loosen (or tighten), that is to say they have a higher wage-unemployment elasticity. Some of these publications also highlight the issue of skilled worker shortages, but this is  a fact of life in a dynamic economy.  There is a remarkable amount of churning going on  in an economy as firms are born and others die (Davis and Haltiwanger, 1998). The question is whether this has become greater than was the case in the past and I see no evidence of this whatsoever, outside Financial Services. Every insurance company would always like five more salesmen who could sell thousands of policies, but that doesn t  mean that wages are going to rise. In  any  case, the occupations that are in short supply and whose wages have risen are included in the wage data. So, in my opinion, at this point in time, it appears that wages are the dog that hasn t barked. My view is that wages are not going to increase much any time soon when insider and outsider pressures are low. By that I mean, firms don t  have the  ability  to pay as  their profits have been squeezed (insider power is low) and, as I have said previously,  there is a good deal of slack in the labour market resulting from increased unemployment and immigration to the UK (low outsider pressures) (Blanchflower, Oswald and Garrett, 1990 & Blanchflower et al. 2007). I have some sense from my regional visits that the fear of unemployment among workers  is elevated, although, there is limited data on the issue (see Blanchflower, 1991 and Campbell et al, 2007). Workers these days seem increasingly aware that they can be replaced by immigrants and/or that their employer can move his or her production facility abroad. This limits workers  bargaining power. These pressures manifest themselves in  the recent low settlements figures. Lower wage inflation and higher unemployment are usually thought of as describing the Phillips curve. However, the time series results do not provide universal support for the theory. The results of estimated Phillips curve relationships appear to be time-specific, data-specific and/or country-specific. Chart 7  shows  the standard  relationship  for the UK. There is evidence of a downward-sloping curve at points during the 1970s  and  1980s, but since the 1990s the curve has been flat. In other words, for the past 15 or so years there has been no trade-off between inflation and unemployment   we have had our cake and eaten it. The Phillips curve does not exist in the UK data, and doesn t appear to hold in many other countries. In contrast, the wage curve describes an inverse relationship between the wage rate and  the local unemployment rate, where the causality runs from the amount of joblessness to the level of wages. The wage curve is derived from micro-data and is concerned with aggregation and missing variable biases. It is very much in the tradition of the economics of walking about. The wage curve is stable across time and countries or regions   the wage curve seems universally described as where ln w is the log of the real wage, ln U is the log of the unemployment rate in the worker s area, and the other terms control for characteristics of the worker (and t is time, usually years). The equation tells us that the unemployment elasticity of pay is -0.1. A doubling of unemployment is then associated with a drop in real wages of 10%. The  wages of the workers in the smallest, usually non-union workplaces who are excluded from the main wage surveys have a much larger wage-unemployment elasticity of around Wage curves of this general form have been found in random samples of individuals and establishments in over 40 countries. Sanz-De-Galdeano and Turunen (2007) find a euro area wage curve over the period 1994-2001. A recent example for the UK is by Bell, Nickell and Quintini (2002) who use data from the New Earnings Survey for the period 1976-1997 and reject a Phillips curve in favour of a wage curve. Their main findings are as follows (Table 1 column 1, first stage panel). dummies, year dummies and regional trends. The wage curve appears to be an empirical regularity or law, as confirmed by Nijkamp and Poot (2005) in a recent meta-analysis on a sample of 208 wage/unemployment wage curve elasticities from the literature. They conclude that "the wage curve is a robust empirical phenomenon   but there is   evidence of publication bias. There is indeed an uncorrected mean estimate of about -0.1 for the elasticity. After controlling for publication bias by means of two different methods, we estimate that the 'true' wage curve elasticity at the means of study characteristics is about -0.07". So why do we find evidence of wage curves, but not Phillips curves? Margo (1993) cites two principal reasons related to the  use of  microeconomic versus macroeconomic data, the former being typically used for the estimation of wage curves and the  latter  for Phillips curves.    First, less-aggregated data provide many more degrees of freedom than  a decade or so of time series data. And second, he suggests that work at a lower level of aggregation can reveal aspects of human behaviour that lie hidden in the aggregate time series.  A number of authors, including myself, have attempted to model the Phillips   curve using micro data, controlling for country/region and time fixed effects.  When we  do, we find that the autoregressive nature of the macroeconomic theory tends to disappear (Blanchflower and Oswald, 2005). These two factors suggest that much macroeconomic data is suspect as it suffers from aggregation biases of uncertain sign and magnitude. Except in isolated specifications, there is not persuasive support for a simple Phillips curve. It seems more sensible to view the data as being characterized by dynamic fluctuations around a long-run stable wage curve. ###newline###  longer answer requires a bit of background information on the controversial relationship between money growth and inflation. Chart 8 shows that there is a reasonably strong correlation between the growth of broad money and inflation (CPI) over the long run in the UK. However, in the short run the correlation is much less clear. As indicated in the table below, for the period 1875-2006, the contemporaneous correlation coefficient was 0.7; breaking down these series into the periods before and after 1972 shows that the correlation remains quite strong. However, if one looks at the data for 1992-2006, it becomes clear that in the shorter term, the correlation weakens, indeed the correlation coefficient for this period is just 0.3. The weakening of the correlation in recent years has arisen because of fast rates of money growth alongside remarkably stable and low inflation. So what are the explanations for  this outcome? Part of the explanation is certainly the recent growth in financial  innovation, in other words the proliferation of instruments which act as substitutes for traditional means of exchange. Furthermore, with increased liberalisation of capital markets and the associated free movement of money, the link between domestic monetary aggregates and the real economy has become weaker. The changes I have mentioned make it difficult to distinguish between supply  and  demand shocks to money stocks. The days when monetary policy could be conducted using a weather vane are long since passed!8 However, we know that in advanced economies characterised by financial innovation, money stock movements tend to be dominated by money demand shocks rather than money supply shocks. Looking more closely at the recent UK data, it is clear that the pickup in M4 growth over the past two years has largely been driven by rapid increases in the deposits held by non- bank financial companies (known as Other Financial Corporations or OFCs). As Chart 9 shows, this sector is made up of many different businesses, which are likely to use their money holdings in different ways. Consequently, it is difficult to interpret the likely implications for inflation of the increase in M4 holdings by OFCs. While one could speculate that institutional investors (such as pension funds) and securities dealers could use their increased holdings to purchase other financial or real assets, with inflationary implications, equally the increase could simply reflect a structural or portfolio shift in demand, in which case the  inflationary  implications would be limited. This difficulty in interpretation is  exacerbated  in  that much of the increase has been from  Other Financial Intermediaries . The demand for money by these companies, ranging from housing credit corporations to special purpose vehicles is not well understood. However, most economists believe that the current rapid rise in money in the economy is really the result of changes in the demand for money, which is consistent with the stable inflation experienced in recent years. Despite the fact that the money supply is not targeted by the  Bank, it  is a variable that  will continue to be monitored and analysed. Not only does money growth and its impact  on liquidity contain important information about future economic developments, it can  also play an important role in shaping inflation expectations. Over the course of the past hour I ve shown you a number of areas of research that I ve been working on to investigate recent developments in the UK economy. In some cases  the results I have obtained have been surprising, and not necessarily in line with what theory would tell us. We saw that there has been an increase in employment over the past couple of years, driven by an increase in self employment. At the same time, there has been a strong increase in inactivity   mostly discouraged workers unable to find work as the labour market has loosened   and unemployment, particularly among those under the age of 24.  It is hard to reconcile this with survey evidence that seems to indicate capacity shortages, and increased labour productivity which suggests firms have been working  their workforce and capital more intensively. The rapid rise in self-employment has also been something of a mystery; it has arisen partly on account of immigration, partly through moves to self-employment from some older workers who had previously been inactive, and possibly partly a result of rising house prices, which have loosened capital constraints. However, we have found no evidence that the commonly-held reasons for people to turn to self employment   changes in regulation, tax changes, or changes in the minimum wage   have been significant. And despite the claims of the doomsayers, wages remain benign, which as far as I am concerned is to be expected, consistent with the loose labour market and increased self- employment. On the last topic of my research, the relationship between money supply and inflation, we ve clearly seen the importance of walking around; the relationship appears to have broken down in recent years, but in the context of financial innovation and capital market liberalisation, we understand why this might be so. As for whether this is important for monetary policy, we have to form our own judgements based on the data. I hope this has shown you the importance of  sniffing the air , and putting the data before the theory where this seems warranted. This is of particular relevance in my role as a member of the MPC, where rate setting decisions must be made on the basis of a wide variety of data, both quantitative and qualitative, and even small developments can have significant implications   such developments have particularly influenced my voting decisions over the past few months. The rationale for my decision to vote for a rate rise this month was to ensure that inflation expectations remain anchored, given rising food prices, recent further increases in oil prices, more robust world growth, and the March inflation outturn. As you can see, I owe a lot to Bernard Corry. He was a big influence on me, and on the way I conduct my research. And although he first opened  my eyes to the importance of  the man on the Clapham Omnibus, perhaps more importantly he revealed to me the importance of a more basic form of transport   Walking About. ###newline###  Friedman, M. and Schwarz, A. (1971), Monetary History of the United States 1867-1960, Princeton University Press. Nijkamp, P. and J. Poot (2005), "The last word on the wage curve? A meta-analytic assessment", Journal of Economic Surveys, 19, 421-450. Summers,    L.H.    (1991),     The  scientific   illusionin empirical macroeconomics , Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 93(2), pp, 129-148