 It is great to be here in Scotland, which I am pleased to say is the 3rd leg of what amounts to a gradual tour of the UK since I joined the MPC last June   I have already been to Wales and Eastern England, and I m off to Southampton in May. As part of the MPC's efforts to understand what is happening across the economy, MPC members undertake regular trips to different parts of the UK. This supplements our assessment of the official data and surveys. Monetary policy is ultimately a judgement based on uncertain readings of what is happening and how things might pan out. So although I am talking tonight, my visit is also about listening and seeing. And as you may know,  while I and my family live in the US, I  spend well over half of  my working month in  the  UK, where I take  part  in  MPC  meetings  and  discussions  and  make regular speeches and visits   such as this one   to find out what is happening    in the regions and countries of the UK. So I feel very much engaged in the process of setting UK interest rates.  External MPC members are meant to be drawn from a variety   of perspectives and backgrounds, and the common thread is that they must be experts in their fields. That is one of the strengths of the committee. There is certainly no need for membership to be restricted to those that live in the Home Counties.  In my view, the  MPC is strengthened and discussion enriched by having different perspectives and backgrounds, so that we reach informed decisions that keep inflation close to target. My plan tonight is to talk about recent developments in the UK labour market in some detail and then to briefly set out my thoughts on the outlook for growth and inflation. ###newline###  The period since a formal inflation target was adopted in the United Kingdom has been characterised by low and  stable inflation, thus fulfilling  the Bank of England s mandate  to which I now find myself accountable. The stability of inflation has brought broad benefits to the economy, facilitating more rapid and less volatile economic expansion, which in turn has been associated with a decline in unemployment. Over the period 1976-1996 RPIX inflation averaged 7.4% and since then it has averaged closer to 2.4%. CPI inflation fell from 7.5% in 1992 to an average of 1.5% since 1997 (Chart 1). The improvement in the performance of the economy is closely associated with inflation targeting and independence of the Bank. Our remit is to target CPI inflation at 2%. Furthermore, if CPI inflation falls below 1% or rises above 3%, as it nearly did in December, Governor King would have to write a letter to the Chancellor detailing the necessary actions to be taken by the Bank to bring inflation back to target.   The surprise   is that we have never had to do so.  It doesn't look like we will have to for a while either   as inflation is now falling steadily and likely to be back around, and probably well below target, by the end of the year. Over the years since inflation targeting was implemented the labour market has had an improved performance on almost every measure. The level of employment is set by the level of aggregate demand of course. Monetary policy has a significant impact on aggregate demand. As monetary policy is loosened aggregate demand rises and unemployment falls. At some point in a recovery labour shortages start to emerge along with rising inflationary pressures. The key question is how much unemployment remains before these pressures emerge. This level of sustainable unemployment can be thought of as the equilibrium rate at which there is no systematic tendency for inflation to rise and fall. The equilibrium rate of unemployment is impacted by any variable that influences the  ease by which an unemployed individual can be matched to available job vacancies and   by any variable which raises wages in a direct fashion despite excess supply in the labour market. I refer to it as the equilibrium rate   or Constant Inflation Rate of Unemployment (CIRU)   rather than the NAIRU, following my predecessor on the MPC, Steve Nickell, who argued as follows: Chart 2 shows an estimate of the change in the equilibrium rate using a Kalman Filter   (see Staiger, Stock and Watson, 2002). It also includes two dotted lines to show the margins of error associated with this estimate. If we take the Kalman Filter estimate at  face value, it is apparent that the equilibrium rate has fallen steadily from around 10% in December 1985 to 4.6% in December 2006. This suggests that there is currently a considerable degree of slack in the labour market as the actual unemployment rate (5.5%) is well above the equilibrium level. Indeed, the amount of slack   as measured by the difference between the two rates   has not been this large since June 1994, when the unemployment rate was 9.4%. Of course, such estimates are not very good around end points   emphasised by the widening of the error bands   and a measure extracted using a Hodrick Prescott filter gives a number closer to the actual unemployment rate, but my judgement is that the CIRU has fallen (Blanchflower et al, 2007). The fall in the unemployment rate has reflected a number of factors. On the one hand, there has been a change in macro-stability   unemployment has fallen in most, but not all, member countries of the OECD. On the other hand, there have been important micro- economic reforms. The most significant of these has been an increased onus on the unemployed to look for work, coupled with  initiatives to help  the effectiveness of their job search.  The decline in the percentage of youths in the labour force, who typically   have higher rates of unemployment, has also contributed. And the recent inflow of migrants from the A8, who are more likely to be in employment, has had the effect of reducing the equilibrium rate of unemployment. An increased emphasis on more flexible work patterns has also likely had an impact. Other reasons as to why the CIRU  might  have fallen include: the changed climate of industrial relations (Kersley et al, 2006) and  the move to less centralised bargaining; a decline in union membership; and product market reforms (Wadhwani, 2001). This lecture examines the causes and consequences of this improvement in broader terms, identifying the wider trends in the labour marker over the past decade and more recently, and considering the prospects for the future. I consider six issues. ###newline###  Table 1a sets out the major changes in the composition of the UK labour force for the period 1997-2006Q4 in levels. Table 1b does the same for rates. Most notable is the decline in unemployment, with 300,000 fewer jobless individuals in 2006 than in 1997. Employment increased by more than 2.5 million over the same  period.  The unemployment rate thus fell from 7.2% to 5.5% between these years, while both the employment and activity rates rose. The self-employment rate was broadly the same in 2006Q4 as it was in 1997. There has been a significant improvement in the level of unemployment prevailing in the UK not just since 1997, but considerably earlier. The most notable feature of the immediate post-war era was of low rates of unemployment   which averaged 2.5% from 1945-1975. This situation reversed itself at the end of the 1970s when the unemployment rate rose from 5.3% in June 1979 to 11.9% in June 1984. The rate declined to 6.9% in  June 1990, then increased to a new peak rate of 10.6% in March 1993, and subsequently declined again until March 2005 to 4.7%. Since that date the  unemployment rate has  risen; at the time of writing (February 2007) the unemployment rate for December 2006 stood at 5.5%. Chart 3 plots unemployment using two different measures, the claimant count based on  the numbers claiming benefit and that based on the ILO count derived from the Labour Force Survey. It is notable that since the early 1990s, when unemployment was high and the two series gave very similar rates, the series have separated;  the  claimant  count started to give a much lower rate of unemployment than the ILO series and has continued to do so. As an illustration of the difference, in 2004, there were 600,000 fewer benefit claimants than there were surveyed unemployed. In effect, around 40% of those who  found themselves unemployed did not sign on, and that remains the case today. The principal reason behind the separation of the two series is probably the tightening of benefit rules, but rising immigration and rising participation of older workers are also likely to have contributed more recently. In the most recent data for October-December 2006, there was a decline of both ILO unemployment (-23,000) and in the claimant count (-13,500). This was dominated by a decline in unemployment among 18-24 year olds (-20,000) and over 50 s (-20,000), partially offset by an increase in unemployment among 25-49 year olds.  At the same   time there was an increase in the numbers who were inactive (+66,000), with a notable increase of 37,000 in the number of 18-24 year olds who were inactive, which was considerably higher than the decline in their unemployment numbers. There was also a small increase in the number of inactives reporting that they wanted a job (+5,000) as   well as in the number of temporary workers reporting they couldn't find a permanent job (+30,000) and in part-timers saying they couldn't find a full-time job (+29,000). Chart 4 shows the contributions to unemployment by duration. It is apparent that the decline in unemployment since 1997 was the result of a fall in  the proportion of long-  term unemployed.  The contribution from those who have been unemployed for less than   a year is much less volatile over the cycle, reflecting the fact that long periods of unemployment can reduce a workers human capital. However, the proportion of the unemployed who have been continuously unemployed for at least 12 months rose from 19.8% in October-December 2004 to 23.5% in October-December 2006. The proportion  of the claimant count continuously claiming unemployment benefit for at least 12 months also rose from 15.7% in November 2004 to 17.1% in January 2007. The earlier movements reflect both the economic expansion of the period and the introduction of government policy aimed at assisting individuals back into work (for example, the New Deal programmes). The New Deal programmes are  distinct  for different groups of individuals, but each aims to improve the chances of individuals in finding jobs. For example, New Deal 25 Plus, which was introduced in 1998, is a mandatory programme designed to address the problems of long-term unemployment in individuals aged 25 and over. Those entering the scheme are initially offered advice on how to improve their chances of becoming employed, but should work not  be  forthcoming then they may be offered additional assistance, including a training  allowance. The scheme appears to have been reasonably  successful.  An  evaluation survey in 2004 found that three-fifths of scheme participants had gone on to unsubsidised employment.1 Chart 5, worryingly, shows that the unemployment rate of the young has picked up over time. Indeed, in 1997 18-24 year olds constituted 23.9% of the unemployed compared  with 29.8% in October-December 2006. In addition, Quintini et al (2007) have noted that over the period 1995-2005 the UK had the largest increase in the ratio of youth to adult unemployment rates in the OECD (Chart 6); the UK moved from having a ratio below the OECD average in 1995 to being well above it in 2005. ###newline###  It is apparent from Chart 7 that for the period 1945-1980 UK unemployment was below US unemployment, but during the 1980s and 1990s it was above it. Between 2002 and 2005 the UK rate was lower than the US rate, but returned to being above it in October 2005. Unemployment in the UK is currently lower than the EU27, EU15 and euro area averages for December 2006, of 7.5%, 7.1% and 7.6% respectively, but higher than, for example: Austria (4.6%); Denmark (3.2%); Ireland (4.4%); Luxembourg (4.8%); and the Netherlands (3.6%).2 Interestingly though, the UK saw the second biggest increase in unemployment in the EU in 2006 on a year earlier of +0.4 percentage points; only Romania had a bigger increase. Unemployment rates among the member countries of the OECD declined from 6.4% to 5.8% between 2005Q4 and 2006Q4; the only member countries that experienced increases were the UK, Hungary and Luxembourg.3 Over the past decade, unemployment rates around the OECD have been lower than in the previous decade.4 This is shown  in  Table 2: the average unemployment rate for the  period 1990-1997 for the EU15, for example, was 9.6% from 1990-1997 compared with 8.0% since then. Only in Germany, Austria and Japan was there no improvement. The performance of the UK labour market was significantly better than all other countries, except Ireland, based upon the extent to which the second period average is below  the  first period average. ###newline###  In part it is likely to reflect global factors given the broad changes in observed unemployment rates in the OECD, principally, as stated earlier, macroeconomic stability. However, other important factors behind the decline in unemployment have been: a) reductions in the replacement rate in the UK along with tightening in benefit rules  (Nickell, 2006); and b) the decline in union power in the UK.  Union membership has  been in decline since around 1980, having risen strongly during the 1970s. The numbers  of union members fell from a high point of approximately 13.2 million in 1979, to 6.7 million in 2005. Union density rates reached a high point in 1980 of 50.7%, and have fallen steadily since that point to 29% in 2005. In 2005, only 17.2% of British private sector employees were members compared with 58.6% of public sector employees (Grainger, 2006). ###newline###  It is clear from Table 1b that the activity rate has increased since 1997, but that hides very different trends by gender; the male participation rate has declined while the female rate has risen. Interestingly, the aggregate changes are primarily driven by changes in the participation rates of older workers, particularly  for  women (see Guti rrez-Dom nech  and Bell, 2004). Chart 8 shows that both the rates for women aged 50-59 and 60+ have risen steadily over time, whereas only the 65+ rate has risen  for  men.  In contrast, for  both men and women participation rates for those aged 18-24; 25-34; 35-49 have been broadly flat, while participation rates for those under 18 have declined to below 50% across both genders. There are a number of suggestions as to why older workers have started to participate  more in the labour market. One suggestion is that the most recent increases could reflect concerns over pension provisions in light of both the pension shortfalls announced by many firms, and low annuity rates. Other possible explanations are: changes  in government policy that have reduced the ability of public sector workers to retire early; falls in the real value of statutory pensions; and increased life  expectancy.  The most recent increase in the inactivity rate likely reflects the inability of workers to find work   they are so-called discouraged workers. Older workers who enter the labour force do not claim benefits or report being unemployed. They are disproportionately self-employed. In 2006, self-employed workers (aged 16+) were on average 6 years older than their employed counterparts (45.7 vs. 39.7 respectively). Chart 9  illustrates that the age distribution of the self-employed is skewed  to the right, compared with that for employees. It seems plausible that younger workers  are less likely to have the necessary human capital (experience) to become self-employed. They are probably also more likely to be credit constrained, limiting  a larger proportion  of them from starting a new business. At the other end of the distribution, older workers face retirement, but that is not an issue for the self-employed. Indeed, many retirees (either at state pension age or earlier) may take advantage of the opportunity self-employment brings to remain in the workplace, providing their skills on their own terms. It is probably also fair to say that there is an element of risk in becoming self-employed, and this risk can be minimised if workers  have previously ensured financial stability (e.g. mortgage paid off) by working for others. What about the possibility that the increased participation of older workers has displaced younger workers? Blanchflower et al (2007) found that, despite the fact that activity rates among older workers had increased in all regions, there was no correlation between the increased activity rates of older workers and the increased unemployment rates of youths. ###newline###  Since 2000, total employment in the UK has increased from 27,434,000 to 29,036,000, or 1,602,000. Of this, 549,000 entered self-employment and 530,000 the public  sector. Hence, over the seven year period 2000-2006, approximately 70% of the growth in employment was in self-employment or the public sector (Hicks, 2005). Self-employment as a proportion of the UK workforce is high by international standards (Blanchflower, 2000, 2005). In October-December 2006, out of 29,036,000 workers, 3,794,000, or 13.1% were self-employed. The marked increase in the number of self- employed, and in the self-employment rate, in the 1980s is particularly notable as is the decline in the numbers and the rate during the 1990s (Chart 10). It would appear the primary reason for the decline in the self-employment rate from 1995 until 2000 was a shift in a large number of workers from self-employment to employment within the construction industry. This reflected work by the Inland Revenue to stop employers treating employees as self-employed workers in order to avoid paying NIC s, nor provide benefits, training or observe employment protection laws. While the total number of workers employed in the construction industry remained steady at just over 18 million between 1995 and 2000, the proportion of workers declaring themselves to be self-employed fell from 46% to 33%. By 1997, 200,000 construction workers had reclassified themselves as employees, explaining most of the reduction in self- employment in construction between 1995 and 1997. Following the downturn, the self- employment rate picked back up, to around 13% in 2006. Between September 2002 and September 2003 the number of self-employed increased by 280,000. During this period a number of tax changes were implemented, including: reform of capital gains tax; and reducing the rate of corporate tax on smaller companies. The largest increase in self- employment of 120,000 was found in banking, finance and insurance and was dominated by the 35-49 age group, although there were also large increases in the 50-64/59  and  65/60 and over age groups. Both the proportion and number of employees working in the public sector rose significantly during the recession of the late 1980s, peaking at 23.3% of total employment in late 1991.  Between June 1992 and June 1998, employment in the private sector grew  by 1,865,000 (9.5%), while public sector employment declined by 741,000 (12.5%). Between June 1998 and June 2005, employment in the private sector increased by 1,281,000 (5.9%) compared with a rise in the public sector of 691,000 (13.4%). In September 2006, there were 5,855,000 public sector workers and 23,150,000  private sector workers (Labour Market Statistics, First Release, February 2007, Tables 3 and 4). It seems unlikely that there will be similar growth in employment in the near future from the public sector (because of more stringent fiscal arrangements) or even from self- employment, which is cyclically rather volatile. ###newline###  Chart 11 shows the evolution of real wages since 1990 using both the RPI and the CPI. It  is apparent that real wage growth actually turned negative on these particular measures in the mid-1990s. However, this period was short lived and the ensuing period of stability  has led to strong growth in earnings. Nevertheless, growth has been flat or slowing on  most measures since late 2004. It is also apparent that over the period 1997-2006 the gender earnings gap has narrowed.  In 1997 full-time median hourly earnings for men  were 21% higher than for women based on ASHE/NES data. By 2006  the  ratio was  down to 14%. There is evidence that earnings inequality has risen for men and fallen for women over   the past decade. Chart 12 shows that, based on ASHE/NES data for full time hourly earnings, the value of the 90th percentile over the value of the 10th percentile earnings, or 90:10, increased for men whereas for women it declined. There was little change in the 50/10 for men or women, so the rise in earnings inequality is driven by increased male earnings above the 90th percentile.  Katz et al (1995) found, using NES data, that there  was a large increase in wage inequality among both males and females in Great Britain between 1980 and 1990. So the more recent results confirm a continuation  of  the  previous trend for males, and a change for women. Rising earnings inequality has occurred despite the fact that a National Minimum Wage was introduced at  3.60 per hour for adults in April 1999. The rate has subsequently incrementally increased, most recently to  5.35 on 1st October 2006.5 There  are  additional, lower rates for those aged 18-21 and 16-17. The minimum wage is set nationwide in nominal terms and hence its real level varies markedly by region; being much higher outside London and the South East and that is where it is expected to bite (Stewart, 2002), because it will enter at a higher point on the wage distribution. The minimum is also most likely to bind for  unskilled 22-24 year olds who  are paid  adult rates and 18 year olds who jump from the 16-17 year olds  rate. Chart 13 shows how two of the latest NMW rates compare to wages at the bottom end  (10th percentile) of the wage distribution in each region using ASHE, and additionally for each age group using the LFS micro-data. According to the data, the newly announced minimum wages are likely to be a binding constraint for employers in all regions except London and the South East for the over 22 s and in all regions for those aged 18-21. Taking the LFS data at face value, it is possible that employers may respond to (or have already responded to) the higher minimum wage rates by cutting back on employment. If that were the case, then one might argue that the natural rate of unemployment may have been pushed up recently. Most studies7 have failed to find statistically significant evidence that the introduction of the NMW, and past increases to it, have had adverse affects on the demand for labour and employment. While it is too early to explicitly test the impact of the most recent  increment, it is clear that if the NMW continues to rise then eventually it will start to have an impact on the amount of labour firms employ and the natural rate of unemployment. ###newline###  Another important change in the labour market that has occurred recently is that the population has started to grow faster, predominantly as a result of an increase in net  inward migration, rather than natural change. This is particularly important for regions where the inflow of immigrants has reversed long term declines in, and aging of, populations. As I noted in a recent speech, population growth in the UK as a whole has been remarkably low by international standards over the past thirty-five years (Chart 15). Between 1971 and 2004, the UK population grew by just 7%, less than most of the other EU countries, Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand and the United States.  However,  the UK population is estimated to have grown at a faster pace since the turn of the millennium, rising by 1.8 million (3.2%) since 2000 (Chart 16). The main cause of this increase has been an increase in net inward migration; the ratio of births to deaths has seen less variation. Both the inflow and outflow rates have risen, but the inflow rate has risen more rapidly, with an influx of migrants from eight East  European countries   known as the Accession 8, or A8 for brevity (the Czech Republic; Estonia; Hungary; Latvia; Lithuania; Poland; Slovakia; and Slovenia). As you may have gathered from press coverage, the numerical flow has been particularly large  from  Poland, but as a proportion of the home population, the flow has been especially dramatic from Lithuania and Latvia.   Approximately 1.6% of the home population of Lithuania   and 1.25% for Latvia have come to the UK in the last two years according one data  source, compared with 0.8% from Poland and 0.2% from Hungary. It appears that 500,000 workers are likely to be an upper estimate of the number of A8 migrants that could potentially be in the UK in late 2006. But the data suggest that  as many as half of the migrants that have come to the UK have not  stayed permanently. There is little or no evidence to suggest that that the new A8 migrants have come to the UK to claim or receive benefits: they have come to work. National Insurance number (NINo). During 2005-2006, 41,400 workers registered in Scotland for National Insurance numbers. These new immigrants are in general much younger than the native population. The average age of someone born in the UK and living in Scotland in 2006 was 40, compared with 26 for foreign-born inhabitants. According to the Labour Force Survey, the greatest proportion of these new immigrants who have come to Scotland are also from the A8, accounting for one in five of the arrivals since 2002. A similar proportion has come from other EU countries, with the rest coming fairly evenly from other countries around the globe. It is plausible, of course, that an influx of immigrants could displace natives or less recent immigrants, but there seems little evidence to sustain such a view.  The recent influx of  A8 workers into the UK would not appear to have had many displacement  effects on native workers   consistent with a large literature on the subject   demonstrated by the continuation of the fall in the unemployment rate; these new workers would appear to  have complementary skills to the native labour force. Gilpin et al (2006) recently conducted a careful econometric analysis of the impact of the new A8 migrants. In  particular they focussed on their impact on the claimant count, as  this is not a sample. They found that: Shimer (1998) argues that time series changes in the natural rate of unemployment in the US are driven by demographic changes; the declining natural rate of unemployment over the past decade or so has resulted from declines in the proportion of individuals in the population that had high propensities for unemployment. So the aging of the baby boom generation was particularly  important  as  the proportion of the population that  was young   and subject to high unemployment rates   declined over time. Barwell (2000) found, using data from the Labour Force Survey that about 55bp of the 565bp fall in the UK unemployment rate between 1984 and 1998 can be accounted for by changes in the age structure of the labour force. A more recent analogy for the UK is that the workforce has increased in size as a result of adding a group   the A8   with a relatively low propensity to be unemployed8 and claim benefits. The workforce appears more flexible and mobile than it was before the entry of workers from the A8. They had no entitlement to benefits  so the replacement rate in the economy has fallen, once again lowering the natural rate of unemployment. Evidence suggesting that there is greater wage flexibility in the UK than in the past is presented in Table 4 (Blanchflower and Oswald, 1994a, b). It estimates a  set  of log  hourly wage equations. As one moves to the right various controls (dummies for year, region, age, sex, race and schooling) are added. The final column includes an interaction term between A8 migrants and the unemployment rate, which is significantly negative. This suggests that the wages of A8 migrants are more flexible than those of  other  workers. ###newline###  It is appropriate to have a brief look at the Scottish labour market, which has been doing pretty well recently.  Chart 17  shows that unemployment in Scotland is now below the  UK average for the first time in more than a decade.9 Currently, the Scottish unemployment rate is 5.2% compared with 5.5% for the UK as whole. The employment rate in Scotland is 76.1% compared with 74.5% for the UK and the activity rate is 80.3%, compared with 79.0% for the UK.  The claimant count for 18-24 year olds in January  2007 in Scotland was lower than a year earlier, whereas nationally it was higher.  So on   all of these measures Scotland is doing well. A Scottish success story is also apparent in a number of other labour market indicators. The number of economically inactive individuals in Scotland reporting that they are looking for a job has declined steadily over the past three years, whereas nationally the number has increased. Similarly, the numbers of part-time workers in Scotland who say they can t find a full-time job has stayed broadly constant, whereas nationally it has increased. And the number of temporary workers who say they  can t  find  a permanent job has declined in Scotland, since December 2003. The strength of the Scottish labour market, and UK labour market in general, would lead me to expect to see a further improvement in the incapacity benefit data. These data are produced with a significant  lag and are only available nationally, but  they indicate that  the incapacity benefit caseload fell by 42,000 to 2.68 million in the year to August 2006. The number of people claiming workless benefits (unemployment benefits, incapacity benefit and income support) in Scotland was approximately 483,000 in February 2006. This is a reduction of over 14,900 since the same period in 2005.10 In terms of earnings, Chart 18 suggests that the relative strength of the Scottish labour market, in comparison with the UK, has been reflected in a pickup in earnings  in  Scotland. Median, full-time, weekly earnings have been rising faster in Scotland than the UK since around 2004. The obvious question is, as with other UK regions, whether this improvement will continue in the future given three increases in interest rates  and a  strong pound. ###newline###  In summary, I have identified a number of key, recent labour market developments in the UK. These include: Unemployment is currently high relative to CIRU   this would conventionally be interpreted as evidence of an  unemployment gap  and a relatively weak labour market. The joint movements of unemployment and inactivity have to be interpreted with care when trying to draw inferences regarding the tightness of the UK labour market. The UK labour market has become more flexible with the enlargement of the EU and increased pool of potential workers. The expansion of the EU and increases in the proportion of workers describing themselves as temporary are likely to weaken  outsider  pressure on wage costs. ###newline###  In my view, the labour market for the UK, as a whole, has continued to loosen over the past twelve months or so. Labour demand has remained firm or picked-up in many sectors, but on the whole has not kept pace with the additional supply. Consequently,  while employment has risen, so too has the degree of slack in the labour market. The other major considerations in terms of monetary policy are: the degree of spare capacity within firms; and inflation expectations. Capacity utilisation within manufacturing firms such as measured by the BCC and the  CBI as well as the Bank's Agents continue to be around the average for the past decade. The BCC long run survey measure of capacity within services is also around its ten-year average. There is a considerable degree of disagreement over the level of the output gap prevailing in the UK economy   which is the sum of capacity within firms and in the labour market. This is notoriously difficult to measure   indeed it isn t  directly  observable. My view is that slack in firms has remained broadly constant over the past  year or so and the slack in the labour market has continued to increase. The output gap in my view continues to increase in size, suggesting that the potential for the economy to grow in a non-inflationary way is substantial. The pound is now higher and three interest rate rises have yet to have their full impact, alongside the fact that the natural rate of unemployment has fallen. If inflation persists above the 2% target for too long the worry is that individuals will start to revise up their expectations for inflation going forward. This may lead workers to demand higher wage settlements to offset the expected fall in their real wage. Inflation expectations did rise early in 2006, perhaps reflecting the preannouncement of energy price rises, but subsequently expectations appear to have fallen back. The most recent YouGov/Citigroup survey data for February indicate a median expectation that consumer price inflation will be around 2.4% over the next year, down from 2.7% in  January  and the lowest level seen since November last year. The survey also recorded  a  fall  in average expected inflation over a five- to 10-year time span. I expect these measures to continue to fall as inflation steadily declines, as it surely will, driven by base effects and the recently announced cuts in gas and electricity prices. I expect inflation to be back at target by late Spring/early Summer 2007. The Committee s projection for the probability of various outcomes for CPI inflation in  the future is given by Chart 21, based on market interest rate expectations. If economic circumstances identical to today s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC s best judgment is that inflation over the subsequent three years would lie within the darkest central band on only 10 of those occasions. The inflation profile is a little higher than in the November Inflation Report in the near term, but then falls back a little further. There are differences of view among the Committee concerning the central projection. My own particular view is that there is a slightly greater margin of spare resources in the economy than embodied in the central projection, reflecting both greater spare capacity within  businesses, and a greater degree  of slack in the labour market. I therefore believe that inflation will recede more quickly and to a greater extent than the profile shown in Chart 21, and be below target at the two- year horizon. Other Committee members subscribe to a view that pricing pressures may prove stronger than in the central projection, as a result of strong demand and high asset values. The uncertainties about the outlook for inflation, as in November, continue to be judged to be somewhat greater than normal, and I, like every other Committee member, stand ready to act appropriately given future developments. The uncertainty, in conjunction with the margin of spare capacity within firms and in the labour market, additionally reflects concerns regarding the evolution of the exchange rate and prospects for world growth, among others. The world economy looks a little stronger now than it did six months ago. The most   recent FOMC decision (31st January) yielded a continuation of the pause in policy tightening first abated at their August meeting. However, the FOMC s statement  suggested that there now appears to be a more favourable growth/inflation trade-off for  the US, reflecting recent data releases. There appears to have been a soft-landing in the housing market. The pickup in euro area demand, perhaps with the exception  of  Germany, seems to be continuing. The exchange rate has risen significantly over the past few months and has contributed to the degree of monetary tightening facing the UK economy. It is uncertain where the exchange rate will move next, but looking ahead, the MPC assumes sterling will gently  fall back over the next couple of years. That being said, it is my principal belief that the evolution of the labour market will dictate to a significant extent the prospects for the UK economy and inflation in coming months. But you would expect me to say that, I am a labour economist and now at Stirling. ###newline###  Notes: Employment includes employees, unpaid family workers and those on government schemes. The self-employment rate is the proportion of those in employment that are self-employed. ###newline###  Kersley, B., C. Alpin, J. Forth, A. Bryson, H. Bewley, G. Dix and S. Oxenbridge (2006), Inside the Workplace: Findings from the 2004 Workplace Industrial Relations Survey, Routledge, London.