 I want also to reflect a little today on the health of banks in the UK. Since last summer, and particularly since the turn of the year, investors have written down the value of banks in advanced economies. Does this signal concerns about banks  resilience and robustness? Or about their returns? ###newline###  The FPC is charged with identifying risks and taking action to protect the resilience of the UK financial system. In essence this means two things. First, we need to be confident that the regulatory framework in the UK addresses the risks not just of individual financial firms, important though that is, but also the risks inherent in the financial system as a whole. On that front we are well advanced in implementing in the UK a programme of reforms to regulation that is unprecedented in scope and effect. To give some examples of reforms and progress: capital requirements for globally systemic banks have increased ten-fold; and since the crisis, major UK banks  leverage has roughly halved; they have cut the share of total funding accounted for by short-term wholesale funding from nearly % in  to %; reduced trading assets by a third and cut inter-bank exposures by two thirds. The FPC needs to identify, assess and mitigate risks building up over the cycle both in the financial system and in the economy as a whole. Or to put it in the terms of Alastair s warning, to make sure that as memories fade, confidence returns and the dynamics of the financial cycle become more powerful we do not simply make the same mistakes again. ###newline###  The FPC s current assessment of the financial cycle is that following a subdued and low-risk period of post-crisis repair to bank, household and corporate balance sheets, we have now entered a more standard period of risk and credit growth. The stock of private non-financial credit, economy wide, is around % of GDP. As I said earlier, the bulk of this is property-related debt. It is growing at broadly the same rate as nominal GDP. In contrast, in the  years before the crisis it grew annually at around twice the rate of GDP reaching % of GDP in . The stock of household debt relative to income is %, down from % pre-crisis. In , when Bricks and Mortals was published, it was only %. Debt servicing ratios, however, are not stretched at the moment because interest rates are very low   the household debt service ratio is now at  levels of around %. But the composition is very different: in  the stock of debt was half the current level and the interest rate twice the current level. There are good reasons why the sustainable level of household debt may have risen over the past  years. But the current level is still relatively high by historical and international standards and is something that, in my view, the FPC needs to keep carefully in mind when thinking of financial stability. ###newline###  Within this current overall picture of the UK being at the beginning of a period of standard risks, credit growing gently at a similar rate to nominal GDP, and asset prices supported by low long-term interest rates, there are some hotter spots in property markets and elsewhere, such as consumer lending. I will focus on property markets. First and foremost, within the residential property market, lending for buy-to-let has been growing strongly for a number of years. The stock of buy-to-let mortgage lending has grown at an annual average rate of % since . It rose by .% in the year to  Q, while the stock of lending to owner occupiers was unchanged. Buy-to-let mortgages now account for %, by value, of the total stock of secured lending. Lending for buy-to-let has clearly been profitable. At around the start of , lenders were planning to grow their gross buy-to-let lending by, on average, almost % per annum over the next two years, with some challenger banks and smaller building societies planning to grow their buy-to-let books at a much faster rate. A good rule of thumb for financial stability is that when some form of credit is growing fast one needs to look very carefully at whether lenders  underwriting standards are slipping and at what is happening to the The Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) conducted a review of lending for buy-to-let mortgages and concluded that there was indeed some evidence of loosening underwriting standards and a possibility that this might increase. As a result, the PRA Board has issued a Supervisory Statement to clarify expectations for underwriting standards in the market. The statement includes guidelines for testing the affordability of interest payments and a minimum stressed interest rate for use in lenders  affordability tests. There are also substantial tax changes affecting the buy to let market. The FPC s expectation is that the Government s changes in stamp duty and mortgage interest tax relief for buy-to-let, together with the PRA s actions, will probably dampen the growth of buy-to-let lending. Mortgaged buy-to-let accounts for only around % of all housing transactions for house purchase so the impact on the housing market as a whole may not be great. But market dynamics are difficult to predict and given the uncertainty around the impact of the tax and supervisory changes, the FPC decided to wait and see how the market reacted before considering whether to take action on buy-to-let. The Committee continues to watch the buy-to-let market closely. Second, lending to owner-occupiers at high loan-to-income (LTI) ratios remains significant. The FPC took action in  to counter the risks arising from an increase in the tail of overly-indebted households. Its concern was that an increase in the tail of overly-indebted households posed a threat because such households cut back consumption very sharply in a downturn. Transactions, house price inflation and the proportion of high LTI mortgages all cooled down following the FPC s actions and other factors at the time like the introduction of the Mortgage Market Review. All of these variables have since bounced back. Prices and mortgage approvals for house purchase are growing at an annual rate of .% and % respectively. And nearly % of new mortgages extended in Q had LTI ratios just below the FPC s threshold of .   almost double the proportion in /. The third property-related area the FPC has been looking at closely is commercial real estate (CRE). Many countries have experienced repeated booms and busts in commercial property and the UK is certainly no exception. Unlike in previous cycles, however, a much greater proportion of CRE activity has been financed by equity investors, in large part overseas investors, rather than by UK bank lending. The share of equity finance in UK CRE transactions in  is estimated at around %, compared to around % in  and a peak of around % in . So the direct risks to major UK banks from this sector are not as high as one might assume. The fact that there is less UK leverage in the sector does not mean however that a sharp correction in CRE prices poses no financial stability risks. Property is an important source of collateral for UK corporates, SMEs in particular. A sharp drop in CRE values could constrain their access to credit. Recent research by Bank staff found that a one pound rise in the value of a company s property is associated with around a five to ten pence rise in investment. More broadly, Bank staff estimate that around a quarter of business investment is related to commercial property. In this context, it is encouraging to see that the industry itself is taking forward a set of recommendations, set out in the cross-industry report on the  Vision for Real Estate Finance in the UK , for reducing risks to financial stability from the CRE market. The report included, among others, recommendations to build a database of each UK CRE loan and its collateral, as well as using long-term valuation measures for risk management purposes.  The Bank is very supportive of these initiatives   and is working with industry to take them forward. The UK CRE market has shown marked signs of easing in  H and  Q. The annual growth of UK CRE prices weakened to % in March and CRE prices fell by .% between February and March, the first monthly fall since . And the amount, by value, of secondary market transactions fell by around % in Q relative to Q and % relative to a year ago. The CRE market seems to have gone into a deep freeze ahead of the EU referendum. The FPC, of course, also assesses risks that originate outside the UK financial system but can, if they crystallise, damage its stability. The Committee has also identified risks around the current global macroeconomic conjuncture and around emerging markets. And there are concerns about potential risks in some sectors of financial markets where there has been substantial investment in asset classes in which liquidity may be limited. And the FPC assessed the risks around the EU referendum to be the most significant near-term domestic risk to financial stability. There will always be risks to UK financial stability from outside the UK financial system. The point I want to emphasise today, however, is how important UK property markets and property-related lending have been and will continue to be for UK financial stability. I would expect the FPC s attention to risks around property to increase as the credit cycle becomes more established. ###newline###  I want now to look at stability from the banking end of the telescope. As I have said, property-related lending is the largest component of UK banks  domestic loans. Mortgage lending, in particular, is the single largest asset class on UK banks  balance sheets. This was not always the case. Until the s, short-term loans to non-financial businesses constituted the majority of UK banks  loans. Looking back further, fewer than % of banks  loans to businesses at the start of the twentieth century had a contractual term greater than a year   loans were mainly used for working capital or to support cash flows rather than to finance long-term assets. Banks acted in line with the advice in George Rae's celebrated banking textbook, published in :  As a banker, you are a dealer in money, or in securities readily exchangeable for money, and building-land does not come within this category. It is practically inconvertible into money on rational terms, and ought therefore to have no place amongst a banker's assets.  It is clear that, now more than ever, the returns and resilience of the banking system are intimately tied to property markets. Is banks  unwillingness to follow George Rae s advice responsible for their current subdued market values? ###newline###  UK banks currently have an average price to book ratio of around . compared to an average of two in . In other words, investors seem to be assuming that, looking forward, banks will destroy value. This is not the sign of a vibrant banking system ably supporting the real economy. The last time price to book ratios were this low was in the euro-area crisis in / and before that in the global financial crisis in . In those cases, particularly the latter, the fall in banks  price to book ratios reflected concerns about their resilience and indeed their solvency   that is, whether they had sufficient capital to back the riskiness of their assets. Low price to book ratios were accompanied by very high debt spreads on bank debt for the same reason. This time round, banks  low price to book ratios are accompanied by relatively low debt spreads. In the main, they probably do not reflect concerns about banks  resilience, which has improved significantly since the crisis. The FPC and PRA Board, in  and , subjected the UK banking system to severe but plausible hypothetical stress tests. The  test was centered on a sharp contraction in UK economic activity   in the test house prices fell by % and CRE prices fell by %. The  test featured a global slowdown emanating from weak growth in emerging-market economies. The results of both tests showed that, on the whole, UK banks would be able to withstand these scenarios and continue lending to the real economy. Therefore, the current low price to book ratios probably reflect concerns about banks  future prospects. That is, whether they can make adequate returns to satisfy shareholders  expectations. The most obvious reason for the difference between banks  returns on the one hand and shareholders  expectations on the other is the disappointing returns that UK banks have made in recent years. Average return on equity for UK banks fell from around % in  to % in . But there may be another reason, on the other side of the equation. Shareholders  expectations may not yet have adjusted to the change in the risk and return profile that banks now represent. I want to look in a little detail at both the question of disappointing returns and the question of unrealistic expectations. First, what is behind the disappointing returns? It is not lending on residential property. Our latest estimates of the return on equity of bank mortgage books seem to be around %, on average, beaten only by overdrafts and asset and motor finance. Indeed, UK banks  underlying return on equity on retail lending overall is currently around %. Margins on the flow of UK retail business for the large UK banks are currently lower than margins on the stock because new mortgages are being written at a lower average interest rate than average back-book mortgage rates. So return on equity on new lending is lower. Some of this is probably due to the fact that with low interest rates and high employment, impairment charges are at a very low rate by historical standards   impairment charges as a proportion of total loans are now back to pre-crisis levels. Of course, underlying returns only tell you part of the story. When one adds in the cost of misconduct, including for PPI, that banks have paid and are likely to pay on past retail lending activities, and other costs, the overall returns drop markedly. But even adjusted for conduct and other costs, returns on retail lending still seem to be around %. Cost of equity is the relevant comparator for return on equity. For large UK and international retail and commercial banks it is estimated to be around %. So retail lending does not seem to be the source of the problem. Nor, on the surface, does corporate lending. Estimates of return on equity on SME and corporate lending are around % to %, which is roughly around the cost of equity for these activities, though it s hard to say with absolute precision. Investment banking, however, is a different story; return on equity in the investment banking parts of UK banks is around %. It was % in . Returns at European and US investment banks have followed a similar trend although the decline has not been as steep as for UK banks. Overcapacity, excess costs, removal of the implicit Too-Big-To-Fail government subsidy, tighter capital regulations and restructuring costs are all contributing to reduced returns on equity in investment banking. Large parts of investment banking are not meeting required returns which are estimated to be in the region of % overall for a sample of UK and international banks. Parts of investment banking are therefore not economically profitable. Banks have made good progress on restructuring their overall balance sheet   they have cut funded assets by nearly   trillion since the end of    but they will probably need to shrink parts of their investment banking businesses or boost returns, for example, by increasing prices or cutting costs. Variable remuneration has fallen in absolute terms in investment banking and other parts of banks but that has been offset by an increase in fixed remuneration. Staff cost to income ratios for banks as a whole are similar to pre-crisis levels or if anything a little higher. Banks  staff costs have not fallen anywhere near as much as shareholder returns. Conduct costs have also depressed returns in investment banking as well as retail banking. Indeed, looking forward, concerns about future conduct risks, generally, may also be clouding investors  perceptions of banks  prospects. The scale and uncertainty around conduct losses is notable.  UK banks  overall misconduct costs have totalled nearly   billion to date   they have exceeded   billion per annum in each of the past four years. This uncertainty, one hopes, should fall over time. Turning to the other part of the price to book equation, expected returns, the reforms to the prudential regulation of banks since the crisis and, in particular, to the level and quality of capital required from banks has reduced the risk to investors. That reduction in risk should, all else equal, be reflected in the return investors demand. There are signs that investors have, albeit slowly, started to lower the returns they demand to reflect lower risks. Banks have cut their medium-term pre-tax return on equity targets by about This is welcome and necessary. Some of the reduction probably reflects lower risk-free rates. But some reflects the significant increase in banks  resilience. There may, however, be factors that are still inflating required returns beyond the levels merited by risk. I want to briefly mention two possible factors that may be affecting investors  perceptions of risks and hence of the returns necessary to compensate for them. First, there may be a collective action problem on the part of asset managers. Around half to two-thirds of the shares of the largest UK banks are owned by institutional investors and managed in-house or by asset managers. These tend to operate to common benchmarks and are subject to rigorous peer comparison. Asset managers, particularly those managing assets on behalf of institutional investors that have fixed liabilities, are currently under great pressure to find returns in a low return environment. Before the crisis, banks made high double-digit returns on equity boosted by very high leverage. There may well be a reluctance among managers of institutional money and investment funds to be the first to drop required returns. This could account for some of the stickiness that we have seen in banks  return on equity targets. The behaviour of institutional investors may also explain the so-called  low risk  anomaly. In theory, lower risk ought to be matched by lower returns. But some research suggests that this may not be a simple relationship. The  low risk anomaly , under which lower risk stocks generate no lower   and in some cases higher   returns than higher risk stocks has been identified for banks. A number of possible explanations have been provided as to why this apparent arbitrage opportunity exists, including preferences by fund managers for  high-beta , i.e. risky, assets to try to beat peers and attract inflows, or because there is insufficient risk adjustment when assessing asset managers  performance. The second factor that may be affecting perceptions of risks is regulatory clarity. The crisis stimulated an unprecedented programme of reform of the prudential regulation of banks. Most of the main components of that reform are now being implemented. Some important elements remain, however, including in relation to the capital framework for banks. Uncertainty around the future end point for bank capital could be affecting investors  assessments of the returns required from banks. The official sector needs to give as much clarity as possible about the overall end point of the capital framework. For the UK, the Bank of England s Financial Policy Committee has done that, setting out in December last year its view of the overall capital framework. Internationally, the Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision has said that it does not expect the completion of the remaining elements of the risk-weighted capital framework to increase significantly overall capital requirements. Taking all this together, there is clearly at present a wide gap between banks  disappointing returns on the one side and investors  expectations on the other. This is reflected in current price to book ratios. This gap may need to be closed from both directions. It is, however, clearly not the case that all banking is unprofitable or un-investable. The health of UK retail banking is almost certainly being masked by conduct costs, current and expected, and by outdated and costly business models that need restructuring, especially in relation to investment banking. But the returns expected by investors in banks may well be sticky and have further to fall to come into line with risk. The authorities may be able to assist this by giving greater clarity on the end point of the regulatory structure. On this last point, the stickiness in investors  required returns may be part of a more general adjustment to a lower interest rate environment. We are unable to measure them directly, but there is some evidence that despite the very low market rates we are now seeing across the yield curve, hurdle rates for corporate investment   namely, the rate of return required by corporates on new investment   have not reflected lower risk-free rates but rather have been sticky and remained near pre-crisis levels. The Bank is doing more work on this. A recent Bank of England Discussion Paper looking at measures of finance for productive investment cites data on hurdle rates as a material data gap in assessing the availability of finance for productive investment. The Bank plans to use its Agency network to run a survey of hurdle rates later this year. ###newline###  What would Alastair have made of the issues I have raised today? He knew well the risks that property markets can pose to stability. I hope he would be reassured by the creation in the UK of the Financial Policy Committee within the Bank of England which is now specifically charged with managing these systemic risks. The Committee is monitoring property markets closely. It has already taken action and would not hesitate to do so again if it is needed to protect financial stability. Alastair was also a champion of investor activism. I think investors have a role to play in restoring the economic profitability of banks, both by encouraging business model restructuring and monitoring risks and perhaps by lowering their expectations a little as well. But investors are only one part of the story. Banks need to work with the authorities to implement fully the reforms that have been agreed to boost their resilience. And banks  management need to maintain their restructuring momentum. The business model for banks in the UK may look very different in the future than it did before the crisis. I think it is clear that, in the new framework, it is possible for banks both to lend to the real economy and to make adequate returns.