 The views expressed here are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee. I would particularly like to thank Michal Stelmach and Matt Swannell for their help in preparing this speech. I have received helpful comments from Pavandeep Dhami, Marco Garofalo, Rashmi Harimohan, Jonathan Haskel, Jamie Lenney, Clare Macallan, Kate Reinold, Fiona Shaikh, Fergal Shortall, Brad Speigner, Silvana Tenreyro, Thomas Viegas, and Jan Vlieghe, for which I am most grateful. ###newline###  I voted for lower interest rates at the most recent two MPC meetings, in November and December. In this speech, I want to discuss the factors behind those votes. I will start by reviewing recent economic data, then discuss risks to the outlook, and finish with some comments on monetary policy. To jump to the conclusion, I will make four main points. First, with softer global growth and high Brexit uncertainty, the UK economy has remained sluggish. The slowdown has created a modest output gap, and there are signs that the labour market is turning. Second, the most likely outlook is a further period of subdued growth, and hence a disinflationary backdrop of a persistent   albeit modest   output gap. Third, the neutral level of interest rates may have fallen further over the last year or two, both in the UK and externally. Fourth, against this backdrop, it probably will be appropriate to maintain an expansionary monetary policy stance and possibly to cut rates further, in order to reduce risks of a sustained undershoot of the % inflation target. With limited monetary policy space, risk management considerations favour a relatively prompt and aggressive response to downside risks at present. Growth has slowed markedly over the last year, both overseas and here. Global growth slowed below % YoY (PPP-weighted) in , the weakest since . In the UK, the economy has barely grown since the first quarter of last year and the YoY growth in GDP has fallen below % for the first time since . Some recent business surveys have been better, some worse. But, taken as a whole   and figure  shows some trends in the BoE Agents  Scores   business surveys are generally soft and consistent with little or no growth in the economy. It is unusual for growth to slow so much when fiscal policy and monetary conditions are supportive. Bank Rate remains negative in real terms, and somewhat below the MPC s estimate of neutral. Mortgage rates are around record lows. Public spending has picked up markedly, with the sum of real government consumption and investment up by -% last year (based on data for Q-Q), the strongest since  (see figure ). The key factor behind the slowdown has been persistently high policy uncertainty, generated both at home and abroad. In the UK, firms and households have faced Brexit-related uncertainties, with risks of a possible no-deal Brexit and uncertainties over the UK s eventual trading relations with the EU and elsewhere. At a global level, trade policy uncertainty has surged (see figure ). Tariffs on US-China trade have risen sharply, there have been actual or threatened tariff hikes on a range of other economies, and there has been a sharp rise in non-tariff protectionist measures. Moreover, the broadening of the stated rationale for these measures   from the initial focus on addressing bilateral trade deficits to include disputes over intellectual property theft, currency policy, industrial subsidies, the structure of domestic sales taxes, and migration policy   means that what started out as a dispute between two countries has much wider implications. There is extensive evidence that high uncertainty with downside risks hinders economic growth. When firms and households fear that something bad might be about to happen, the incentive to defer major spending decisions with large sunk costs is high. The incentive to wait is greater if it appears possible that uncertainty will be resolved soon. It follows that the recent persistent rolling uncertainty, in which firms and households keep expecting uncertainty to be resolved a few quarters ahead, is likely to be especially damaging. Spending gets deferred in the hope that things will be a little clearer, and then   when uncertainty persists   spending is deferred again and again. Moreover, given that Brexit-related uncertainties are greater for the UK than other countries, some of that spending is probably diverted elsewhere. These adverse effects of high uncertainty are evident in the data, both for the UK and elsewhere. World trade volumes are down from a year ago, the first significant decline since , with a marked deterioration in business confidence across many countries. Business investment growth across the major advanced economies has slowed from % YoY in late  to about % YoY now. In the UK, business investment has risen only slightly in real terms since the Brexit referendum in mid-, and firms  investment intentions remain weak. Exports have suffered from weaker world trade growth as well as decisions by firms elsewhere to diversify business relations and supply chains away from UK-based firms. Consumers have turned more cautious. Despite the positive backdrop of rising real wage growth, low unemployment and very low mortgage rates, household spending growth has slowed to around % YoY from roughly  % YoY in -. ###newline###  Uncertainties over Brexit and trade policy have also hit potential growth. For example, weak investment has capped capital stock growth, while Brexit contingency plans and preparations have absorbed resources. As a result, productivity growth has fallen further below the (low) OECD average since early . Even so, the MPC judged in last November s MPR that underlying growth in recent quarters has fallen slightly below potential, such that the economy had a modest but rising output gap of roughly  % of GDP. Data since then have been on the soft side. Hence, the output gap now may be a little bigger, perhaps  % to  % or so of GDP in my view. At first glance, this view of rising spare capacity might appear hard to reconcile with some key labour market trends. For example, private sector regular pay growth reached % YoY in the middle of last year, the highest since . Moreover, the jobless rate has been roughly stable at just below % since early last year, the lowest since the mid-s and a little below the MPC s estimate of the equilibrium jobless rate ( %). However, the pace of average earnings growth over the last few quarters probably overstates the underlying trend. Some of the recent strength probably reflects erratic compositional effects   notably marked weakness in employment in low-paying occupations   that are unlikely to persist. Most other guides do not suggest that pay growth continued to strengthen over the last year. For example, the -month median for private pay deals has been fairly stable at .% since early last year, while survey guides to pay growth levelled off or edged down recently (see figures  and ). Regular pay growth has cooled a bit in the last couple of months, and the MPC s central forecast (which I agree with) is for average earnings growth of about  % over this year. Moreover, while the jobless rate is a useful guide to labour market conditions, by itself it does not always give a clear and timely signal whether the economy has spare capacity and whether slack is rising slightly or stable. One issue is that all estimates of the equilibrium jobless rate are uncertain, and the MPC estimates it has edged down from % to  % in recent years. This downtrend has reflected various factors, including changes to the tax and benefit system, increases in less secure forms of work, improved educational attainment and population ageing, many of which are ongoing. I suspect that the equilibrium jobless rate now may have fallen a little further, perhaps to around %, and hence is close to the actual jobless rate. The evidence is not yet decisive either way. But this view that the jobless rate currently is close to equilibrium would, in my view, become stronger if, in line with the MPC s November forecast, the softer tone in pay growth over the last few months is sustained during this year. The second issue is that the jobless rate usually reacts quite slowly to changes in the output gap. One reason for this is that there are costs to changing headcount (although generally less than for investment decisions), and hence firms might wait to see if changes in demand are sustained before fully adjusting staff numbers. As a result, slowdowns in the economy tend to be reflected initially in lower capacity use: the rise in unemployment usually comes later. For example, figure  shows the typical response (estimated over the period from  to  Q) of the jobless rate (relative to equilibrium) and capacity use in firms (based on a range of business surveys) if the output gap rises by % of potential GDP and then remains constant. There is some variation over time, but on average capacity use falls sharply in the first couple of quarters (by nearly one standard deviation). Then, as firms react to the drop in demand by cutting jobs (and investment), capacity use recovers somewhat and unemployment rises. Eventually, a persistent output gap of % of GDP is reflected in a persistent rise in the jobless rate of .-.pp, but it takes a year or two for the full rise in unemployment to come through. Using this, figure  shows results for a persistent slight shortfall in growth relative to potential, which in my view is similar to the current and prospective situation. So, as before, the output gap rises by % of potential GDP, but now this occurs gradually, such that the output gap rises by  % of GDP after two quarters,  % of GDP after four quarters and % of GDP after eight quarters. As before, the jobless rate would eventually rise by .-.pp, but very little of this occurs in the first few quarters. For example, after three quarters, the output gap would have reached .pp of GDP, but the jobless rate would have barely risen (by roughly .pp, which is well within the margin of error in the data). By contrast, capacity use in firms responds fairly promptly and markedly. The implication of this is that, in trying to judge whether recent economic growth has been below trend, the sharp drop in capacity use in firms   more than one standard deviation below average across various business surveys   is probably at least as important as the fact that the jobless rate has been roughly stable (see figure ). Inflation remains subdued. Core inflation has slowed a little below % since late , while business surveys suggest that firms  expectations for selling prices have softened (see figure ). With the economy slowing, the recent pickup in labour cost growth has been reflected in a marked squeeze on margins rather than higher prices, with the profit share in GDP in recent quarters at its lowest since . The number of profit warnings by UK listed companies is the highest since , and recent business surveys suggest that firms  expectations for their profitability are weak. This deterioration in profitability also seems to have prompted some tightening in banks  lending standards to companies. In theory, one might argue that the recent margin squeeze poses an upside risk to future inflation, because firms could seek to rebuild margins through higher prices. But, with sluggish demand restraining prices, I suspect it is more likely the margin squeeze will be passed backwards onto lower cost growth and cutbacks in corporate spending. This next leg of the slowdown   the transition from declines in capacity use and profits to weakness in employment   may now be underway. For example, job growth has slowed, while trends in vacancies, redundancies and firms  hiring intentions have all weakened markedly (see figure  and table ). So, to sum up on the current situation, economic growth is sluggish, spare capacity is rising, while inflation is subdued. The economy still has a slow puncture and this seems to be spreading to the labour market. Unless prospects for demand improve very quickly, some increases in unemployment (or under-employment) seem likely in the next few quarters. ###newline###  Let me turn to the outlook. In last November s Monetary Policy Report, the MPC s central forecast was for subdued near term growth, and a pickup in the spring of this year. That forecast was based on the assumption of an orderly transition to a deep free trade agreement between the UK and the EU. It was also based on the prevailing yield curve, which included a bp cut in Bank Rate. The forecast of an upturn in the economy was driven by two key inflexion points   a recovery in global growth, and reduced Brexit uncertainty. This outlook implied that slack would rise slightly in the near term, but that faster growth would propel the economy into excess demand two or three years ahead, leaving CPI inflation slightly above the % target three years ahead. That relatively benign scenario is still possible. Brexit uncertainty has fallen a bit since last autumn. Risks of an imminent no deal Brexit have receded and it seems almost certain that the UK will formally leave the EU on January . Some UK-specific indicators of uncertainty   such as the DMP Brexit uncertainty index, the Deloitte CFO survey and the gap between the implied volatility of sterling over the next  months and the implied volatility of a range of other currencies   have fallen back from the highs of late  (see figures  and ). There appears to be a truce in the US-China trade war. Moreover, some modest fiscal easing is likely in the UK, given manifesto commitments during the election campaign. We will know more once full Budget plans have been presented. But my own view is that, even if the economy improves slightly from the recent pace, risks for the next year or two are on the side of a more protracted period of sluggish growth than the MPR forecast. Those uncertainty gauges are still relatively high compared to the years just before the referendum, and there are grounds to be pessimistic on the two key inflexion points of faster global growth and reduced Brexit uncertainty. Global growth may well continue to disappoint amidst high uncertainties over trade policy. Even with the recent roll-back of some tariff hikes, the previous trend of falling tariffs on US-China trade   which had been in place for over  years   has been pretty much fully reversed in less than  months (see figure ). Moreover, since the November MPR, we have seen the announcement of new US tariffs on goods from Brazil, Argentina and France, as well as the apparent breakdown in the WTO s appellate body. The genie of trade policy uncertainty is probably out of the bottle. All this casts doubt on whether the trend towards globalisation   a key driver of business opportunities and investment over recent decades   remains intact or is starting to reverse, making it harder for firms to decide whether, where and how much to invest. Moreover, even though we now have clarity that the UK will leave the EU on January , it seems likely that Brexit uncertainty will remain high. There are still major uncertainties regarding the UK s future trade relations with the EU and other countries, including the extent of any transition periods. There is a non-negligible risk of a cliff edge at yearend. There are also uncertainties over the extent and direction of UK policy changes in other areas, for example industrial strategy and regulation. The DMP survey suggests that while Brexit uncertainty has fallen, an increasing share of firms do not expect Brexit-related uncertainty to be resolved until at least  (see figure ). And, even if and when these uncertainties eventually fade, the recent experience may well, like previous crises, create lasting scars in terms of risk aversion and caution. For example, the Deloitte CFO survey suggests that   even with the recent drop in uncertainty   CFOs continue to prioritise defensive strategies (eg reducing costs, reducing leverage and increasing cashflow) rather than expansionary strategies (eg launching new products, capital investment and expanding into new markets), see figure . An extra downside risk is that the labour market may be about to turn more abruptly, given recent weakness in job vacancies, hiring intentions and profits. A weaker path for employment would probably imply some downside risks to consumer spending. A continued period of sluggish growth would, in turn, imply disinflationary pressures that threaten to keep CPI inflation below target - years ahead. ###newline###  Let me turn to monetary policy. On the back of recent soft data and my view on the balance of risks around the outlook, I voted for a bp rate cut at the November and December policy meetings to underpin activity and reduce risks of a persistent inflation undershoot. I am not going to signal today how I will vote at the next MPC meeting, in late January. That decision will be made at the proper time, in light of all the data and analysis available. But I want to make some general comments on the appropriate setting of monetary policy at present. First, monetary policy cannot prevent the adverse effects on potential growth of Brexit and global trade policy uncertainty. Government policy choices in those areas will significantly affect the economy s prospects and living standards, not just in the next few years but over a longer horizon. Nevertheless, provided inflation expectations are well anchored and inflation is close to target, the Committee can aim to keep demand broadly in line with supply over time in order to achieve a sustainable return of inflation to target. Second, unlike many major spending decisions for firms and households, monetary policy changes do not involve large sunk costs and hence the cost of reversal   for example, after a year or so   is relatively low in my view. As a result, whereas persistently high uncertainty may lead firms to inaction, the same does not necessarily apply to monetary policy. Monetary policy is a relatively flexible tool. Third, the neutral level of interest rates may be lower than expected, with persistently high uncertainty reinforcing the downward effects on the neutral rate from factors such as low productivity growth and demographic change. The MPC estimated in  that the trend neutral interest rate in coming years will be a range of -%, with a central estimate of  %. As the Committee noted, additional factors   less slow-moving than trends in productivity and demographics   can also affect the neutral level of rates. And, without being too definite, there are signs that persistently high uncertainty may be pushing down further on the neutral rate, both here and elsewhere. For example, growth has disappointed in the UK and externally even while policy rates across advanced economies are at or below most estimates of neutral. The consensus among external forecasters is that   even with the jobless rate around current levels and inflation around target   the UK policy rate will not return to % over the next five years (see figure ). These medium-term rate expectations have fallen over the last year. The forward path of interest rates implied by gilt yields has continued to decline and indeed does not now exceed % at any point within the next  years (see figure ). There are also signs of lower neutral rates in the US and EA. If the neutral rate in the UK has fallen further, monetary policy may be providing less stimulus than intended. It follows from these points that if the current and prospective conditions of a modest output gap and subdued inflation are likely to persist, then it may be appropriate to cut interest rates further. This directional bias is reinforced by risk management considerations. With a low neutral rate and limited monetary policy space, risk management implies that policy should respond in an asymmetric fashion   if tightening is needed, it should be gradual; if easing is needed, it should occur promptly. And when the economy is soft, as at present, it is better to err on the side of too much stimulus rather than too little. This is because the MPC s ability to return inflation to the % target is asymmetric at present. If the economy overheats and inflation is above target, the MPC has ample scope to tighten policy to push inflation back down to target. But if the economy is stuck with sluggish growth and below-target inflation, the MPC has more limited scope for stimulus to lift inflation back to target. However, scope for easing is more limited than in the past. The MPC has said that the effective lower bound (ELB) for Bank Rate is positive but slightly above zero, which implies that Bank Rate could be cut by slightly less than bp. The MPC can expand QE further, pushing gilt yields down. But gilt yields are already quite low ( year yields are around -bp). As my MPC colleague Jan Vlieghe recently noted, if the policy rate hits its effective lower bound and is expected to stay there for many years, then longer term rates would probably be close to the effective lower bound, and at that point, scope to depress yields further may be limited. To be sure, it might still be possible to add extra stimulus by skewing gilt purchases to the longer end. Moreover, the MPC could still expand QE or reintroduce forward guidance even if the entire yield curve is at the ELB. But the effectiveness of such measures may be less   and surely is less certain   under those conditions. In all, as the Governor said last week, with the current toolkit, a reasonable judgement is that the combined conventional and unconventional policy space is in the neighbourhood of the  basis points cut to Bank Rate seen in the pre-crisis easing cycles of - and - (see figure ). That is a considerable amount of possible stimulus. But it is worth noting that those episodes were not recessions. It is pretty obvious in my view that, with the current toolkit, the MPC could not add stimulus on the scale of the - recession, which saw Bank Rate fall by more than bp and the launch of QE. With limited policy space, the risk management approach described above aims to reduce risks that the economy ends up in the difficult situation of a self-perpetuating low inflation trap with inadequate scope for monetary policy to return inflation to target. Of course, it is possible that we cut rates now and then find that the economy rebounds and renewed tightening is appropriate, say a year from now. I don t think such a quick reversal is likely, but it is not inconceivable. I would not regard such a reversal, if it occurs, as a policy failure. It would be a benign outcome: monetary policy would have helped underpin the pickup and, given the economy currently has some slack, we would have time to tighten again before significant excess demand emerges. Conversely, if we defer easing near term and, in the event of persistent economic weakness, face the need for greater easing later on, then risks of a low inflation trap   which would certainly not be a benign outcome   would rise. In my view, this issue has become more important over the last year, given the recent economic slowdown and the possibility that the neutral rate has fallen further. To be clear, the UK is not currently in a low inflation trap: the MPC has not exhausted its policy options, and inflation expectations are not unusually low. But you just have to look across other major advanced economies to appreciate that the risk of being stuck in a low inflation trap, with a self-reinforcing circle of caution, sluggish growth and depressed inflation expectations, is not just a theoretical possibility. In steering through these challenges, the MPC will of course be guided by our remit and the aim of ensuring a sustainable return of inflation to the % target in a way that supports output and jobs. ###newline###  We model output gap dynamics using a simple Vector Autoregressive (VAR) model. A VAR is a system of equations that describes the dynamic evolution of set of variables based on their common history. Our model is based on a disaggregated approach to measuring the output gap, and includes measures of labour market slack and capacity utilisation. The variables in our model are all endogenous, ie each of them can be explained by an equation based on its own lagged values, the lagged values of the other variables, and an error term. The model is estimated over -Q using quarterly data: OGt is the output gap, expressed as a percent deviation of actual GDP from its equilibrium (ie potential output). CAPUt is the capacity utilisation within firms. This measure is based on business surveys by the CBI, BCC, BoE Agents, and CIPS (weighted across the different sectors of the economy) and expressed in standard deviations from the - average. HGAPt is the gap between the current number of average weekly hours worked and their trend (or equilibrium) level. UGAPt is the unemployment gap. This is expressed as the difference between the actual unemployment rate and its equilibrium rate. LPGAPt is the labour participation gap, measured as the difference between actual and trend labour market participation. The VAR s impulse response functions allow us to trace how a shock propagates through the system. The experiment in this speech applies a shock equivalent to a % rise in the output gap, which affects all variables in the subsequent periods. Since for the purpose of this exercise we don t want to be explicit about the exact ordering of the variables, we calculate the generalized impulse responses as described by Pesaran and Shin (), as those do not depend on the assumed order in which the shock affects each variable. In a stationary VAR as above, the impact of a temporary shock tends to fade over time as the variables converge back to their steady states. Therefore, imposing a persistent shock (as in figure ) requires applying a series of shocks that   cumulatively   hold the total effect constant over time. (For example, a % deviation in GDP from potential in the second quarter is the sum of the second-quarter shock and the marginal impact of the first-quarter shock after one quarter, etc.) The arithmetic behind a gradual shock (as in figure ) is very similar. Overall, our results are consistent with the broader literature which suggests that factor utilisation tends to lead factor adjustment in the business cycle (eg Bils and Cho ()).