 The views expressed here are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee. I would like to thank Lena Anayi, Tom Belsham, Tomas Key, Clare Macallan, Mette Nielsen, Chris Redl, Emma Rockall, Rana Sajedi, Brad Speigner, Michal Stelmach, Matt Swannell, Silvana Tenreyro and Alex Tuckett. This work contains statistical data from ONS which is Crown Copyright. The use of the ONS statistical data in this work does not imply the endorsement of the ONS in relation to the interpretation or analysis of the statistical data. This work uses research datasets which may not exactly reproduce National Statistics aggregates. The UK is experiencing major demographic changes from population ageing, reflecting rising life expectancy and the maturing baby boom generation. These trends probably do not significantly affect the economy s growth rate from quarter to quarter. But demographic trends are causing deep structural changes in the economy. In the last 10-15 years, these effects from population ageing have been fairly benign, reducing the equilibrium jobless rate and neutral interest rate. However, effects of population ageing will become more challenging in the next 5-10 years, with greater downward effects on labour supply and, possibly, productivity. If the UK is to avoid a further slowdown in potential economic growth, productivity growth will need to pick up, which will probably require continued investment in physical and human capital.i The early phase of population ageing   expansion of the 40+ and 50+ age groups   has been underway for some time. Twenty five years ago, the number of people aged 20-49 years was roughly 40% greater than the number aged 50 years or over. Now the two groups are almost the same size. The cross over point will come in the next three or four years,ii with   probably for the first time ever   more people aged 50+ years than The UK has now entered the middle phase of population ageing, with rapid growth in the 60+ and 70+ age groups (see figure 2). The late phase, with rapid growth of the population aged 80+ years, will start in the mid-2020s. These ageing trends are widespread across advanced economies and some emerging markets. The point at which the 50+ population exceeds the 20-49 population occurred more than 10 years ago in Japan and in the last few years in Germany, France and Italy.iv Canada will get there in 2020-25, China around 2030. In some countries, for example Japan, E Europe and S Europe, ageing is being accompanied by outright population decline (see figure 3). That is not the case for the UK. On central estimates, the UK population will continue to grow in coming decades, albeit more slowly than recently. While these broad demographic trends are pretty much definite, there are some uncertainties in the exact profile, in particular regarding migration. The UK projections above use the ONS central estimate. If we use the ONS low migration variant,v population growth over the next 10 years would be 0.3-0.4% per year, roughly half the central projection. Moreover, since migrants tend to be younger than the existing population, lower inward migration would imply faster population ageing. It may seem tempting to compress demographic change into one statistic, such as the dependency ratio.vi But, in practice, the economic effects of ageing occur at different stages. For example, the early stage of population ageing (rising share of the 40+ and 50+ population) tends to lift private savings and hence depress real interest rates. Downward effects on workforce participation are driven more by the 60+ share and 65+ share   the middle stage of ageing   and hence occur a little later. The late stage of population ageing (rising 80+ share) will tend to have larger effects on public spending on health and social care.vii Demographic change affects the economy in a range of ways.viii I want to focus on labour market effects   the equilibrium jobless rate, labour supply and productivity   as well as effects on interest rates and monetary policy. Some are already evident. Others may develop with more force over coming years. Most of the effects of ageing discussed in this speech are compositional effects. In aggregate, older people have different patterns of work, spending and saving than younger people and so a rise in the population share of older people can affect how the economy works. These effects may be reinforced, or countered, by behavioural changes. Some of these may reflect reactions to population ageing, including through shifts in government policies on, for example, pensions, retirement and benefits. We also need to allow for other behavioural changes, especially from rising education attainment. Over the last 25 years, the share of the 25-64 age population with tertiary level (ie university or similar) education has risen from 19% to 43%, a bigger rise than in most advanced economies (see figure 4).ix The tertiary education share among people aged 25-40 years is now around 50%, and the rise in this measure has slowed in recent years. But even if this levels off, the tertiary education share among all people aged 25-64 years will keep rising   albeit more slowly   getting close to 50% in 2030, as highly educated younger cohorts get older. This rise in education attainment will offset or delay the economic effects of population ageing in some respects (eg participation, productivity) but magnify it in others (eg equilibrium unemployment). Let s start with the labour market. Population ageing has probably reinforced other factors pushing down the equilibrium jobless rate, U*.x Jobless rates for younger workers   aged below 35 years   tend to be persistently higher and fluctuate more with economic conditions than jobless rates for older workers (see figure 5). Younger people are often still finding the occupation that suits them best   a process known as  job shopping    and more likely to be in a job that is a poor fit for their attributes and abilities.xi In addition, younger people are often still acquiring skills and experience, and jobless rates for less-skilled workers tend to rise relatively sharply in downturns. The result is that the flows of people between employment and unemployment are relatively high for younger age groups, with a higher share out of work at any point and bigger swings over the economic cycle. Conversely, older workers are less likely to lose their job and if they do, they are more likely (than young people) to become self-employed as an alternative to unemployment. With population ageing, the share of the workforce aged under 35 years is down from 46% in 1990 to 40% in 2000 and 36% now. This shift in workforce composition away from age groups that tend to have high jobless rates has cut the equilibrium jobless rate by about 0.3 percentage point since 2007 and by about 1pp since 1990.xii This is probably smaller than the effects from wider education attainment,xiii but goes the same way. Although the workforce will keep ageing, the effects on U* may not actually increase much in coming years. This is because the big difference in jobless rates is between the under 35s and the rest of the workforce, and most of the drop in the under 35s in the workforce already occurred. Population ageing in coming years will lift the share of the over 55s in the workforce, and cut the share of people aged 45-54 years. But in terms of jobless rates, differences between people in their 40s, 50s and 60s are not that large. Between the early 1980s and the mid-1990s, demographic change lifted participation, because the population shares of prime working age groups were rising, with a falling share of under 25s (see figure 7). More recently, the rise in the older part of the population has started to reduce participation, with an effect of just over 1 pp over the last 10 years (ie just over 0.15pp per year).xv However, this has been offset by two major factors. First, the female state pension age (SPA) has risen from 60 to 65 years   a change that began in 2010 and completed this month. Research by the IFSxvi suggests this has lifted workforce participation among women aged 60-64 years by about 10pp, adding 0.3-0.4pp to the total participation rate. And second, the rise in education attainment noted earlier. At most age groups, especially among women, higher education attainment lifts workforce participation, probably reflecting the extent to which education opens doors to higher pay and wider job opportunities (see figure 8).xvii Using a simple model, I estimate that rising education attainment has lifted participation by roughly 1 pp over the last 10 years.xviii With these large effects from the SPA and education, the participation rate edged up over the last 10 years despite adverse demographics. Cyclical conditions reduced participation between 2008 and 2013, but this effect largely unwound since then as the economy recovered. Other factors probably also affected participation among specific groups of the population, including rising longevity, changes in annuity rates, benefit legislation and health, but have played a lesser role in aggregate over that period (see figures 9 and 10).xix Looking ahead, the adverse effects on participation from ageing will expand as the population shares of the over 60s and over 70s rise markedly. The population of prime working age has risen by about  % per year over the last 10 years but will fall slightly from 2020 onwards. Our simple model suggests that ageing will cut the participation rate by about 3pp over the next ten years (ie 0.3pp per year)   considerably more than the effect over the last 10 years. Pushing against this, age-specific participation rates are likely to continue to rise, especially for older workers. The SPA for men and women is rising from 65 years to 66 years over the next two years, starting next month, with a further rise to 67 years scheduled for 2026-28.xx The rise in the SPA   assuming it has similar effects to the recent changes   will add 0.1-0.2pp to aggregate participation over the next two years. The rising tertiary education share will also continue to lift participation, although this effect may be less powerful than recently, because the tertiary education share will probably rise more slowly (given that the rise among younger age groups has already slowed). Combining these, this model suggests that in 2019-20, the rise in age-specific participation rates   and especially from the rising SPA   will continue to offset effects of population ageing, with participation roughly stable and workforce growth matching population growth at about 0.6% per year. Beyond that, with no further changes in the SPA scheduled until 2026-28, the effects of ageing will dominate, with the participation rate falling by 0.2-0.3pp per year and workforce growth slowing to about 0.3% per year (such that the participation rate falls by about 2pp in total over the next 10 years), see figure 11.xxi If we use the ONS low migration variant, the combined effects of ageing, education and the rise in the SPA would imply roughly zero workforce growth from 2020 onwards.xxii Under either migration path, the slowdown in labour supply may be reinforced slightly by trends in average hours, given that the over 60s tend to work significantly fewer hours than other age groups, with a higher share of part-time work.xxiii I want to stress caveats here. The rise in the State Pension Age to 66 and then 67 years may have bigger or smaller effects than the rise from 60 to 65 years. It also is possible that rising life expectancy will have greater behavioural effects on labour supply, with people choosing to stay in the workforce for longer, or to work more hours, beyond effects from changes to the pension age and education. So far, such effects do not appear to have been large in aggregate. As noted earlier, a simple model based purely on education, spare capacity and changes in the pension age tracks recent trends in participation fairly well. Moreover, among those in work, there is a clear preference in the 55-64 and 65+ age groups to work fewer hours rather than more hours (for the same hourly pay), see figure 12.xxiv But it is certainly possible that ageing will generate a bigger labour supply response over time. Let me turn to productivity growth. Some research suggests that ageing is likely to hit productivity, not just through a shorter average work week (which might cut output per person) but by reducing output per hour.xxv For example, as people get older, at some point the advantages of work experience may be offset by depreciation of knowledge and skills, and reduced innovation.xxvi The balance between these effects probably varies across different industries and different types of work. Older workers tend to move job much less frequently than younger workers and hence population ageing may impede the diffusion of skills, knowledge and technology use through reduced job-to-job flows.xxvii Against that, some research suggests that when population ageing eventually reduces labour supply, labour scarcity will prompt greater investment in labour-saving technology and automation that will boost productivity.xxviii There is considerable debate over the causes of the UK s recent productivity slowdown.xxix The fact that productivity growth has slowed as population ageing kicks in might seem to indicate some link. But, in my view, evidence that ageing has played a big role in the UK productivity slowdown is not clear cut. For example, productivity growth (output per hour) in 2010-16 slowed from the pre-crisis average (1999- 2007) in all of the UK s 12 regions. But there is little link between regional trends in productivity and ageing. Indeed, productivity slowed by more in regions which had a relatively small rise in the share of over 50s in total employment or in the population (eg London), see figure 13. There also is little link between regional changes in demographics and productivity growth at a sectoral level, for example if we compare productivity growth in the manufacturing or financial services sectors in different regions (see figure 14).xxx Some research that links ageing to weaker productivity growth is based on the observation that in many countries, pay shows a marked hump-shaped profile across age groups. The UK is fairly typical in this respect. Median hourly pay peaks at 40-49 years, falls 7-8% for the 50-59 age group and more than 20% for the 60+ age group (see figure 15). If you assume an individual s pay roughly reflects their productivity, then at first glance these data hint at a marked age-related deterioration in productivity from 50 years onwards   the age group that has recently been growing rapidly. However, in the UK, the lower level of pay among the over 50s largely reflects lower average education attainment for this age group rather than any inherent age-related decline.xxxi Among those with the same education, people aged 50-59 years earn roughly the same as those aged 40-49 years and more than people aged 30-39 years (see figure 16).xxxii Once you allow for education, the notion that there is a major drop off in productivity beyond 50 years does not seem valid in the UK. Taking people of similar education, adverse effects of ageing on pay are modest and confined to people aged 60+, with median hourly pay for this age group about 10% below that of people aged 40-49 years.xxxiii This gap has shrunk over time, especially for those without tertiary education, perhaps because fewer jobs need hard manual labour and the general health of older people has improved.xxxiv Given that the share of over 60s in total employment is still relatively low (10% now, versus 8% ten years ago), the possible productivity shortfall among this age group has probably had only a modest effect on aggregate productivity growth in recent years. Again, these data do not suggest that ageing has been a major factor in the UK s recent productivity slowdown. Nevertheless, while population ageing probably has not been a major factor in the recent productivity slowdown, it is hard to see how population ageing will be positive for human capital in coming years. And, with soft trends in firms  investment intentions, there is not much support to productivity from investment in physical capital either. ###newline###  Let s turn to implications for household saving and real interest rates. Some commentators have argued that population ageing is likely to lift real interest rates, because the rising share of retirees will reduce household saving.xxxv However, the MPC judges that, in practice, population ageing currently is lifting the stock of household assets, both in the UK and globally   and hence is pushing the equilibrium level of global real interest rates lower, and will continue to do so for some time.xxxvi Life cycle theory suggests that people tend to borrow more in the younger part of their working years, accumulate assets during the latter part of their working years and run down their wealth in retirement. This is broadly what you see in the data, both for the UK and other advanced economies.xxxvii Debt is higher among younger households (see figure 17), whereas average household wealth follows a hump-shaped path   peaking around 55-74 years and falling beyond that (see figure 18). At the moment, population ageing means that a rising share of the population is in age groups with relatively high wealth levels (ie 45-74 years), hence lifting the equilibrium stock of savings. In addition, perhaps in response to rising life expectancy, people on the whole seem to be deferring the point at which they usually run down their wealth. For example, the average wealth of households aged 65-74 years is higher, relative to other households, than used to be the case. These effects may be reinforced if, in response to rising life expectancy, people aim for a higher level of savings to finance a longer period of retirement and age-related costs such as social care. It is hard to disentangle this from other factors that may lift people s desired savings (eg risk aversion, bequest motives, accumulating funds for a deposit on a mortgage). But it is notable that the balance of households who believe it is a  good time to save  has risen close to its long-run average even though interest rates remain relatively low in real and nominal terms (see figure 19). For an individual open country, a higher stock of savings would produce an accumulation of external assets. With a similar ageing trend across many countries, the combined effect is to push down on the global equilibrium real interest rate, and this effect could be reinforced if anticipation of lower population growth reduces capital spending growth. Much of this demographic effect on equilibrium interest rates already occurred. From later next decade, this aspect of demographics will not intensify further as the share of the 75+ and 80+ population   age groups at which households are usually running down their wealth in a significant way   rises significantly (see figure 20). A key part of the process whereby interest rate changes affect spending in the economy is through cashflow effects on borrowers, who face rising debt service costs if interest rates rise, and hence adjust their spending. Given the distribution of debts and assets, these effects largely come through people with mortgages and households aged under 45 years or so. These are the groups that typically have relatively high debts compared to income. Moreover, because younger households tend to have relatively low levels of savings, they are generally more affected by changes in credit availability and less able to smooth their spending in the face of cashflow effects. As a result, changes in interest payments have a relatively high impact on their spending (see figures 21 and 22).xxxviii Conversely, the direct effects of interest rate changes on aggregate spending of households aged 55+ years are relatively small. Older people typically have less debt but more assets, and in aggregate benefit in cashflow terms from higher rates. However, people with net savings tend to not adjust spending much in response to changes in interest income. Given the different spending responses by borrowers (who are generally relatively young) and savers (who are generally older), a rise in interest rates lowers spending in aggregate. Of course, the full impact of monetary policy changes, allowing for knock-on effects to incomes, jobs and asset prices, are more complex and their distributional effects are more balanced.xxxix Ageing might affect this part of the monetary transmission mechanism   the cashflow channel   in two ways. The first is that, as the population ages, older people   whose spending is less affected by the cashflow channel   account for a rising share of the population, incomes, wealth and spending.xl Since 2001, the share of consumer spending done by people aged 50 years or older is up from 41% to 52%, while their share in spending on consumer durables is up from 38% to 54% (see figure 23).xli The second is that ageing, along with other factors, has produced marked changes in the aggregate household balance sheet, which might affect the sensitivity of the typical household within each age group. The share of households with a mortgage is down from 42% in 2000 to 28%   the lowest for at least 35 years   with a sharp drop among young people (see figure 24).xlii Conversely, the ratio of household wealth to income has risen sharply. Most households that own their home have no mortgage.xliii These trends are partly the direct result of population ageing, with fewer young households and more elderly savers. But they are also indirect results from the interaction of the shift of wealth to older age groups with the reduced availability of high LTV mortgages, which has made it harder for people with low levels of assets (who are generally relatively young) to get a mortgage and buy a house. Some research suggests that populating ageing has already reduced the effectiveness of monetary policy in advanced economies, so that a given deviation of interest rates from neutral has less impact on the economy than previously.xliv BoE research suggests that this is not the case for the UK so far, and that the total impact of interest rate changes on growth and inflation is similar to the pre-crisis period.xlv The easing in mid-2016 seemed to provide the expected boost to the economy. To be sure, the NMG surveys suggest that the net change in households  income from rising interest rates has become slightly more positive in recent years.xlvi Such a trend, if sustained, might over time reduce the direct effects on spending of interest rate changes. But, this is only one of the ways that interest rate changes affect demand in the economy. Given the rise in the household wealth-income ratio, in my view it also is possible that consumer spending might become more sensitive to indirect effects of monetary policy changes on asset prices.xlvii Clearly this is an issue that needs watching. If the monetary transmission mechanism does become less powerful then, all else equal, monetary policy might need to be more active around a neutral stance to stabilise the economy in the face of demand shocks. To sum up on demographics, although population ageing is a multi-decade trend, it is affecting the economy now and will continue to do so in coming years. For most of the last 10 years, the economy has generally had significant amounts of spare capacity. Under those conditions, it has been appropriate to provide considerable monetary stimulus, in order to support growth above potential and thereby prevent the economy getting stuck in a rut of low capacity use and below-target inflation. Now, with the economy having grown above its modest potential pace for six or seven years that spare capacity has been used up, with supply and demand in the economy broadly in balance. Looking ahead, assuming the economy adjusts smoothly to an average of Brexit end states, economic growth is likely to continue to outpace potential, so that the economy moves into excess demand over the next year or two. As a result, assuming that smooth adjustment to Brexit, the MPC as a whole judge that some further rises in interest rates probably will be needed over time, in order to return to a more neutral policy stance and thereby keep inflation on target over time. My own hunch is that, conditioned on our Brexit assumptions, capacity pressures will probably build somewhat faster than envisaged in our latest Inflation Report projections, reinforcing upward pressure on pay growth. In this case, we would probably need to return to something like a neutral stance rather earlier than implied by the current yield curve. Nevertheless, that assumption of a smooth Brexit adjustment is itself uncertain. Recent business surveys, including those by the CBI, suggest that Brexit uncertainties have caused a marked drop in business confidence so far in Q4. This could be reflected in some weakness in near term activity data. At least some of these Brexit uncertainties might be resolved quite soon. Either there will be a withdrawal agreement and transition period or not. If there is a withdrawal agreement then the range of options for the possible Brexit end state also may narrow. Any such resolution of Brexit uncertainties may change the economic outlook, perhaps substantially. But the monetary policy implications of different Brexit outcomes could go either way, depending on the effects on supply, demand and the exchange rate. For example, a smooth transition to a relatively close economic relationship with the EU would probably boost business confidence, with pent-up demand propelling investment and hiring. The same factors might well cause sterling to appreciate. The net effect would probably be higher growth and lower inflation than our base case. But it is unclear whether it would be appropriate to tighten monetary policy more or less than implied by the current yield curve (or indeed not adjust policy at all, or to loosen): this would depend on the balance between potentially inflationary effects from stronger growth (relative to potential) and disinflationary effects from a stronger pound. Conversely, an early move to WTO trading rules with no transition would probably see business confidence weaken, hitting investment and hiring. There might also be further adverse effects on potential growth.xlviii For the same reasons, sterling would probably depreciate, with the resultant boost to inflation reinforced by any extension of tariffs. The net effect would probably be higher inflation and lower growth, and it may be hard to tell in real time whether any weakness in growth exceeds the deterioration in potential growth. The monetary policy implications could go in either direction. Monetary policy cannot prevent the necessary adjustment in the economy to EU exit. What monetary policy will do is to remain focused on its primary objective of maintaining price stability, and by doing so to contribute to broader stability in the economy as a whole. Figure 1. Selected Countries   Share of Adult (20+ years) Population Aged 50+ Years, 1950-2030P Figure 2. UK   Change in Shares of Adult Population (From 1990) of Selected Age Groups, 1990-2050P Figure 5. UK   Jobless Rates By Age, 1997-2018Figure 6. UK   Participation Rates By Age, 2018 Figure 9. UK   Breakdown of Changes to 15+ Participation Rate Over Five-Year Periods, 2008-28P 
Figure 10. UK   Breakdown of Changes to Workforce Participation Rates By Age Group, 2008-17 Figure 13. UK   Change in 50+ Employment Share and Productivity Growth (2010-16 Average Compared to 1999-2007 Average) 
Figure 14. UK   Change in 50+ Employment Share and Productivity Growth in Selected Industries (2010-16 Average Compared to 1999-2007 Average) Figure 15. UK   Median Hourly Earnings (as Pct 40-49 Year Age Group), Average for 2014-18 Figure 17. UK   Average Household Debt By Age Group (as Pct Average for All Households), 2006-2016 
Figure 18. UK   Average Household Wealth By Age Group (As Pct Average for All Households), 2006-16 Figure 19. UK   BoE Bank Rate and Net Balance of People Who Believe It Is A Good Time to Save, 1997- 2018 Figure 21. UK   Direct Impact of 1pp Change in Interest Rates on Household Cashflow and Spending By Age, Average for 2016-2018 
Figure 22. UK   Direct Impact of 1pp Change in Interest Rates on Household Cashflow and Spending, Average for 2016-2018 Figure 23. UK   Shares of Total Consumer Spending By Age Groups (Split By Head of Household), 2001-16