 I would like to thank Alina Barnett and David Learmonth for research assistance and I am grateful for helpful comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. The CPI in February this year was no higher than in February . This is the first time the UK has failed to record positive annual inflation for over  years. Inflation was briefly negative in late  and early . Before then, you have to go back to the early s, and the agonies of the Great Depression, to find a period when UK consumer prices fell over a sustained period (Chart  plots three-year rolling averages of inflation). Because of the depth of the economic downturn at that time, and the more recent stagnation of Japan, the weakness of price inflation today has raised fears in some quarters about the risks of sustained deflation in this country. The MPC s objective is not simply to prevent prices from falling: it is to ensure they rise at the target rate of % a year. Because of the attention it s been getting, however, I m going to focus today on negative inflation specifically. I ll divide the substance of my remarks in two. One part will discuss the basic economics   how and why it matters if prices decline over a protracted period   the other, the frequency and implications of deflation in the historical data. There are circumstances, in particular when the appropriate or  neutral  real interest rate is clearly positive, and when it s not entirely unexpected, in which mild deflation wouldn t pose a problem. I think Britain was in precisely that position for much of the classical gold standard period, during the second half of the th century (you can see from Chart  that periods of deflation were common at that time; as we shall see, they didn t appear especially damaging for output growth). Deflation becomes a problem if, in conjunction with the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates, it prevents the monetary authority from setting a real short rate that s sufficiently low to ensure stable growth. Following the financial crisis, of course, the developed world has been in exactly that position: the neutral real rate of interest has been extremely depressed, official interest rates have been pushed to the zero lower bound and central banks have employed unconventional means of easing monetary policy. Were it to occur right now, sustained deflation would therefore pose more of a risk than at times when the neutral real rate was higher. But, in my view, those risks are nonetheless relatively contained. For one thing I think the evidence suggests that unconventional policy is effective: even if they don t circumvent it entirely, asset purchases help soften the constraint of the zero lower bound. Second, with the financial system gradually improving my guess is that the neutral real rate of interest is more likely to rise than fall over the next couple of years. Third, and most importantly, I think the chances of a sustained and widespread deflation are in any case low. That s certainly what the international experience suggests. That experience is substantial: we have annual CPI data since  for over  countries, a total of over , data points. In only  cases (barely % of the sample) have consumer prices actually fallen and in the majority of those inflation was positive the following year. Of the  instances in which prices have fallen for more than one year, all but four   two in Japan, two in Bahrain   have occurred in developing countries with pegged exchange rates. In fact, there s a general tendency for changes in inflation to be more persistent when the exchange rate is fixed. At least when policy has a degree of credibility, deviations of inflation tend to peter out relatively rapidly in countries with independent monetary policies. In part this may reflect precisely the freedom to ease policy that, if it s not ruled out by an exchange rate peg, may nonetheless be compromised by the zero lower bound. At least until it began to conduct QE, almost a decade after the economy began to turn down, Japan was clearly in this position. But I suspect it s also because, when there s an independent and credible policy, the risk that inflation expectations become As I say, for us that target is %, not zero. Even if the current undershoot is due mostly to the effect on the level of the CPI of the sharp drop in commodity prices, and should therefore have only passing effects on its rate of growth, our central expectation is that inflation will still be below target in a year s time. All else equal, we probably need to see not just stable prices of commodities and other tradable goods if we re to meet the target over a reasonable horizon, but some further acceleration in domestic costs as well. While that s what the central forecast in the February Inflation Report entails, the MPC will obviously have to be watchful, in the meantime, for signs that  good  deflation is turning into something worse. ###newline###  Something one hears quite often is that deflation is a problem  because it encourages people to postpone consumption . Deflation   or more precisely the expectation that prices will fall   therefore weakens demand, it is said, and this can lead to a vicious circle in which prices are then depressed further. As far as it goes this has some truth to it. But it s at best a partial description of the problem, at worst a bit misleading. It leaves out two important considerations. One is nominal income. Suppose you re told that prices will fall over the next year but that the value of your income will remain unchanged. All else equal, the prospect of falling prices will give you an incentive to save more of your income (i.e. to postpone a bit of consumption). At the same time, the real value of that income will prospectively have risen. On most estimates of the various sensitivities the second effect will dominate the first and consumption should actually rise, even before those price cuts actually arrive. Conversely, if all prices fall simultaneously, including the price of labour (the nominal wage), then there s no boost to real income to offset any increased tendency to save. Not only that, falls in nominal income would also expose the economy to a potentially much more serious risk, namely a rising burden of debt. Because the principal is fixed in nominal terms, shortfalls in cash income make debts harder to service, increasing the risk of financial instability and the pressure on debtors to cut back spending. It s this  debt deflation  channel, emphasised originally by Irving Fisher and studied in depth by Ben Bernanke, amongst others, that is thought to have been the main cost of falling prices and wages during the Great Depression. It s therefore important to understand whether  deflation  is happening simply because there s been a sharp drop in the price of something we buy   oil, say   or whether it s a more generalised phenomenon in which nominal incomes too are falling. The other important factor is interest rates. The incentive to save depends not on inflation expectations per se but on the (ex ante) real rate of interest. As long as nominal interest rates are higher than inflation   and that s been the case through history, more often than not   foregoing   of spending today buys you more than   s worth of spending tomorrow. So this  postponement  effect doesn t suddenly appear when expected inflation dips below zero: it s always there, to varying degrees, and depends on the extent to which expected inflation lies below the nominal rate of interest, i.e. the real interest rate. Indeed, it s partly by tweaking this incentive to save, via the short-term real rate, that monetary policy is in theory supposed to work. If confidence in the future suddenly declines, for example   something that would on its own tend to push up rates of saving   the central bank will tend to react by lowering interest rates and pushing back in the opposite direction, in order to sustain demand. The appropriate real interest rate will therefore change over time. And the relevant question, in this context, is not so much whether people expect any sort of deflation, but whether they expect it at a pace that exceeds whatever is the appropriate real interest rate at the time. If that were to happen, policy would run into the zero lower bound for nominal rates and central banks will find themselves reaching for unconventional policy tools. Similarly, debt dynamics are driven not by nominal income growth in isolation but how that growth compares with nominal interest rates. If the two fall rise and fall together   to the extent nominal interest rates can accommodate movements in nominal income growth   there s no impact on debt accumulation: whatever proportion of income was needed to service debts beforehand is sufficient after the fact. It s when income growth falls a lot further than the interest rate, and therefore when servicing debts requires much more of their incomes than people had expected, that problems can arise. ###newline###  I think you can see the importance of these considerations in the UK, both in recent history and, as it happens, over a much more distant period. In the second half of the th century, and up until the First World War, Britain and much of the advanced world were on the Gold Standard: the price of gold was fixed at  ./oz. Deflation was commonplace. Discoveries of gold occurred only intermittently, and because the global economy   and therefore the demand for currency   was generally expanding, its real price often came under upward pressure. With the nominal price fixed, the only way that could happen is if the denominator of that real price   the price of goods and services   declined. Thus UK consumer prices fell significantly during the s, for example, and again in the late s; they also fell through the s (Chart ). And although real pay tended to grow over time, these deflations were sometimes severe enough to mean that nominal wages declined. Perhaps the authorities of the time were just lucky not to have run into the zero lower bound. But I think this episode illustrates that even protracted declines in prices needn t be especially costly if, for whatever reason, the appropriate real interest rate is relatively high. ###newline###  Clearly, we are not in the same position today. Cuts in interest rates after the financial crisis were crucial in preventing a much worse downturn. They depressed the real short rate, softening what might otherwise have been a steeper rise in the saving rate. Matching the decline in productivity and income growth (Chart ), the resulting falls in household interest rates meant deleveraging could occur without a big jump in gross debt repayments. Net of interest payments, growth of nominal incomes has been little different over the past six years than it was in the pre-crisis decade (Chart ). But balance sheets and gross debts are clearly far larger now than in the late th century. Productivity and real income growth have been significantly lower and, partly for that reason, the neutral real interest rate fell steeply after the crisis and almost certainly into appreciably negative territory. So even without deflation, central banks have found themselves up against the zero lower bound and compelled to employ unconventional policy tools. As a result, there is now less room to deal with any entrenched and protracted deflation, in prices and wages alike, should that occur. ###newline###  There is evidence this has already fed through to spending and to household confidence. Real household consumption too rose at its fastest pace for seven years during the course of . And this occurred despite a marked decline in survey measures of households  near-term inflation expectations (Chart )   little evidence here that weaker inflation expectations delay or depress consumer spending. In truth, I don t think we should be terribly surprised by this. Theory says households will raise consumption one-for-one with any increase in the level of real income deemed to be permanent. In practice people may take time to react to real income shocks; it s also possible they expect some of the recent declines in energy prices to be reversed. But, in the data, there s no correlation between household saving rates and changes in real energy prices, either here or elsewhere in the OECD. This suggests their effects on income are in general matched by equivalent shifts in real spending. Note that the UK is not the only place where consumer confidence has risen in recent months (Chart ). Nor is it unusual to see stronger demand at a time when these survey measures of household inflation expectations are falling. Typically, these near-term expectations surveys track actual inflation. And quite a bit of the high-frequency variation in the CPI arises from things that don t directly affect nominal pay   taxes and import prices, for example   but do affect its real value. When taxes or import prices go down, real incomes rise (and vice-versa). This produces a negative near-term correlation between inflation and real income growth; controlling for nominal pay, there is also a clear negative correlation between surveyed inflation expectations and household optimism (Chart ). These results might give one pause about whether the  delayed consumption  channel really is that important, or whether the surveys of inflation expectations are really telling you about what matters. The link between consumption and real interest rates is not an empirically strong one. Other measures of inflation expectations   for example from financial markets   are less depressed (Chart ). A recent study using US data found that, even controlling for nominal income, there was no correlation across individuals between their reported expectations of inflation and spending. At the very least, the results are a reminder not to consider current inflation or survey measures of household inflation expectations on their own, but in the context of what s happening to incomes and interest rates. ###newline###  That doesn t mean we can rest entirely easy. In particular, it would be wrong blithely to assume that positive nominal income growth will continue, come what may. Deflations have to start somewhere and there is a risk that falling prices will beget yet weaker or even negative wage growth   that today s  good  deflation will metastasise into something a good deal worse. Bordo classifies  bad  disinflations as those that coincide with recessions,  ugly  episodes as steep and generalised falls in nominal quantities, all the uglier in the presence of large gross debts. running at over % and, barring another steep decline in food and energy prices over the next year, headline inflation is likely to rise quite steeply in early . I m also struck by the rarity of persistent deflation in the past, particularly amongst countries with an independent monetary policy. As we ve seen, long periods of falling prices were perfectly common during the Gold Standard. That s inevitable under a commodity peg if, over any period of time, the commodity itself is in fixed supply. The same was true in other countries at the time and, infamously, during the Great Depression. It was only when Britain came off gold, in , that its nominal income started to accelerate. And since the Second World War, and the abandonment of commodity standards, positive inflation has been the norm   so much so, in fact, that the commonly cited example of the Japanese deflation is almost unique. The international data on consumer prices are relatively rich: we have annual numbers for over  countries, most of them back to . In all, across countries and years, there are , separate post-war observations. In only  of these   barely % of the sample   has inflation actually been negative (Chart a); the majority of these  deflations  ( out of ) have lasted no more than a year, many of these shorter episodes coinciding with falls in oil prices; of the  deflations lasting two or more years,  have been in economies with fixed exchange rates, most of those emerging economies; among countries with freely floating exchange rates, only Bahrain and   somewhat more famously   Japan have experienced protracted deflations, both of them twice (Chart b). This is not a common occurrence. ###newline###  Why might deflations be rarer in countries with floating exchange rates, and in emerging economies, and should this provide any reassurance today? Yes, I think   to a degree. One plausible reason for this pattern is that countries with fixed exchange rates give up autonomy to control their own rate of inflation. Instead, domestic inflation is determined by (i) inflation in the country to which their exchange rate has been fixed (most often the US) and (ii) forces affecting their real exchange rate. Those forces are often important in emerging markets: their terms of trade move around more and they are also subject to more volatile financial flows than developed countries. Shocks that would tend to depress the nominal exchange rate, were it free to fall   a drop in the terms of trade, for example, or heightened risk aversion and capital flight   instead show up as negative inflation. It s not just the volatility that s higher, however: it turns out that shocks to inflation are also more persistent in countries with fixed exchange rates (Chart ; see also Monacelli and Gali ()). And while this may simply reflect the particular disturbances affecting the equilibrium real exchange rate   perhaps they play out only over time   it s also possible that the persistence of inflation owes something to the lack of a stable domestic objective for monetary policy. In our theories, wage and price-setting are forward looking: high (low) expectations of inflation over the future drag up (depress) actual inflation today. That s precisely why central banks concern themselves with the stability of inflation expectations. It s also why a credible inflation target is to some degree self-regulating. If people expect inflation generally to be on target, over the medium term, the central bank has to do less actively to ensure it. Notably, the persistence of movements in UK inflation fell sharply after the introduction of inflation targeting in  (Chart ). To the extent this reflects improved credibility it implies less of a need for policy to respond to one-off hits to the price level. ###newline###  We ve heard a lot about the risk that deflationary expectations persuade people to defer spending. We ll no doubt hear it again if inflation were to dip below zero over the next couple of months. But it s at best a partial point. All else equal, the incentive to save depends not on inflation expectations per se but on how far away they are from the nominal interest rate, i.e. the real interest rate. By any measure   even if you use the near-term household surveys as measure of inflation expectations   the real rate is extremely low, and still negative (Chart ). The extensive empirical evidence for this  inter-temporal substitution  channel is in any case relatively weak   as the Governor pointed out recently, the more important threat, particularly in developed economies with large balance sheets, is debt deflation. And in that regard, it s the gap between interest rates and nominal income growth that matters. Notably, nominal income growth has not declined of late. My own view, however, is that the likelihood of a broad and protracted deflation, afflicting wages as well as prices, is pretty low. The evidence suggests that asset purchases positively affect nominal growth   they may not by-pass the lower bound on interest rates but they certainly soften it. My guess is that, with the financial system improving, and signs that the worst fears about the global economy may be subsiding, the neutral real interest rate is more likely to rise than fall over the next couple of years. Over that period, headline inflation will get a sizeable kick upwards, once the falls in food and energy prices drop out of the annual comparison. In the meantime, the UK labour market continues to tighten   low inflation won t be the only influence on pay growth this year   and the boost imparted by lower commodity prices to real incomes is already apparent in higher consumer spending, here and in other countries too. Finally, history tells us these episodes are rare   rare, in the case of developed countries with floating exchange rates, almost to the point of uniqueness.