 In , the University of Chicago held a th birthday party for the great American economist It s possible that, even among those of you prepared to give up a pleasant July evening to come to a talk by a central bank official, an -page tome entitled  A monetary history of [anywhere]  won t have found its way to the very top of your holiday reading list. But it s actually a gripping read, especially the chapter about the Great Depression. It also has a claim as the most influential piece of economic history ever written. The book pioneered a new  narrative  approach to identifying independent changes in monetary policy   the idea being that, to separate these from the more automatic ( endogenous ) reactions of policymakers to the economy you needed to scour the historic record and understand how their decisions were actually taken. It changed economists  perceptions of the role of monetary forces, including monetary policy, in economic fluctuations. For example, it helped to establish the view that the effects of monetary policy on real variables   real national income or its distribution, for example   are in the long run negligibly small. You cannot permanently enrich a country, or raise real wages, simply by easing monetary policy and engineering some inflation. Equally, the book argued that policy can have very powerful effects at shorter, cyclical horizons. In particular, it claimed that the Great Depression could have been averted had the US Federal Reserve not over-tightened policy in the late s and if had it acted more precipitously to loosen it once the downturn began. The appropriate measures would have included an earlier abandonment of the gold standard. They would also have involved  large-scale open-market purchases , designed to contain the rise in private-sector bond yields and supply reserves to the banking system. We have a new name for this   we now call it  Quantitative Easing    but the policy itself is not new. The book therefore had a profound influence on monetary policy makers everywhere, but especially those in the United States. One other guest at Friedman s birthday party, himself an expert on the Great Depression, was the then Fed Governor Ben Bernanke. Paying tribute, he said this:  I first read A Monetary History of the United States early in my graduate school years at M.I.T. I was hooked, and I have been a student of monetary economics and economic history ever since  I would like to say to Milton and Anna: Regarding the Great Depression. You re right, we did it. We re very sorry. But thanks to you, we won t do it again . Only a few years later, as Fed Chair, he was compelled to put his words into action. Nor was it just the Fed who responded in this way. One after the other, in the aftermath of the financial crisis, central banks in developed countries slashed interest rates, extended collateralised loans to banks and purchased significant quantities of government bonds, expanding their balance sheets many times over. Today I want to take a brief look at what QE has done. I also want to add some colour to what the MPC has recently said about its approach to unwinding the policy, drawing in part on the experience of the US Fed. ###newline###  Despite the title of the book, Friedman and Schwartz didn t document  years of the past for the sake of historical interest alone. They wanted to understand the effects of monetary policy. Getting at these is harder than you might think, because empirical economists can t do experiments. In a laboratory, a scientist interested in the effects of one thing on another   call them X and Y   can usually do two important things. He or she can  control  for   in other words hold constant   everything else that might also affect Y. This allows one to isolate the study purely to what X does. It s also possible to move the  independent variable  X around at will, observing directly what it does to the  dependent variable  Y. Empirical economists can t do either of these things. Changes in policy are one of only many influences on the economy and it s not as if we can just switch these other things off. The best we can do is use large samples of data, coupled with various statistical methods, in an effort to even them out. And even if we could somehow freeze the rest of the world it would never be possible (or morally justifiable) then to experiment on it by arbitrarily putting up interest rates. The economy isn t a lab rat. What instead tends to happen, in the real world, is that policy reacts to events at least as much as it causes them. And it s this relationship   from the economy to policy, rather than the other way around   that dominates the data. Friedman and Schwartz s study   the  narrative  method   was an effort to identify the rare occasions when this was not the case. They were trying to uncover natural experiments. If these challenges exist for conventional monetary policy they surely apply at least as much to QE. Our experience is more limited, the data sample therefore smaller. And the policy was very clearly a response to other events, in this case the powerful contractionary forces unleashed by the banking crisis. This has hardly been a randomised trial. So you cannot conclude from the fact of the recession of -, or the weak growth that followed, that QE was of no help. Alarmingly, things might have been that much worse without it. They certainly were in the Great Depression. Within three years of the Wall Street crash, the yield on US corporate bonds had risen to over %, even as the economy was collapsing; thousands of US banks failed, taking a third of deposits with them; industrial production halved and unemployment rose by over % points (Charts a-d compare these things with the UK s experience in the last crisis, with the dashed vertical line drawn at the date of the inception of QE). Equally, there were many other differences between the last financial crisis and the Great Depression, so we can t on the face of it give QE all the credit for having avoided that fate. There was no deposit insurance during the early s, something that surely contributed to the widespread runs on banks and their subsequent failure. In -, as well as conducting QE, central banks cut interest rates close to zero and engaged in direct collateralised lending to the banking system. Governments also provided support to the banking system, via equity bailouts and lending schemes of their own. They also eased fiscal policy more aggressively and managed to avoid the protectionist measures that had exacerbated the Great Depression. To a greater or lesser extent all these things must have helped. So what can we say about the specific contribution of QE? We may not be able to employ their  narrative  method, nor is our experience of QE as extensive as for more conventional monetary policy. But we do have some advantages over Friedman and Schwartz. We have more data than they did, including a lot of high-frequency information on the behaviour of financial markets. This allows us to see the reaction of asset prices to QE announcements over short periods of time, cutting down on extraneous influences. We also have more advanced statistical techniques, helping to refine the estimates of the effects on economic activity. I won t go into all this work in any great detail. (For that you can read a very good and comprehensive survey by Andy Haldane and other Bank economists, and the references therein.) Let me just try and summarise what it says: First, and all else equal, asset purchases do seem to have had a significant impact on economic activity. Some studies get at that effect using existing estimates of the sensitivity of GDP to bond yields and combining those with the impact of QE announcements on those yields. Others estimate the impact on bond markets and activity jointly. There is some suggestion in Haldane et al () that the early phases of asset purchases had more powerful effects, and it s clear that the biggest daily moves in bond yields occurred after the very first QE announcements in early  (Chart ). But on average, and whichever method one uses, there does seem to have been a significant effect on demand. The central estimate in Weale and Wieladek (), for example, is that purchases worth % of GDP boost UK GDP by around .%. Second, if the effect on long-term bond yields is clear, the impact on share prices is harder to detect. On some days after QE announcements equity prices went up   the largest rise happened to be after the extension of asset purchases in October , when gilt yields actually went up   but on others they fell. That doesn t prove there was no impact. By their nature, prices of risky assets are more volatile. Such was the flow of negative news about the economy and corporate profits in , even from day to day, that equity markets often weakened even as bond markets strengthened. The general level of inflation was also very high at that time: every price was going up rapidly. It s therefore more informative to look at asset prices in real terms (i.e. relative to consumer prices). The level of real house prices is plotted in blue in Chart . As you can see, they went up extremely rapidly between  and . But the latest figure is barely any higher than it was in the middle of the last decade. As for shares, real equity prices of UK-facing companies (in red) are still % lower than immediately before the financial crisis (and almost as far below the earlier peak in the late s). As I say, we can t conclude from all this that QE had no impact at all on these prices, even at the margin. Given its effects on longer-term interest rates, and on economic activity, it probably did. But their apparent lack of response does at least demonstrate that the policy had quite a bit to fight against. To the extent there was such an effect, it would be more accurate to say QE helped to prevent these prices from falling further, rather You can tell the same story about QE and the wider economy. All else equal, the policy supported demand, activity and employment. But that support was being provided in the face of significant contractionary forces, arising from both the first phase of the financial crisis and then its unwelcome offspring, the euro area crisis of -. You can see from Chart  that it wasn t until confidence in the single currency was restored in mid-, and a more sustained economic recovery began in the UK (the green line is de-trended GDP), that these asset prices also recovered. ###newline###  Estimates of how QE has affected the economy often assume the effect is invariant: so many pounds of QE means such-and-such an impact on GDP, no matter what else is going on. Yet our experience so far suggests the effect may not be fixed. In particular, it seems to have been larger when QE was first launched than in subsequent rounds. If that can only be a tentative conclusion from the UK experience what s happened more recently in the US is surely more striking. As you know, the Fed has now started to reduce its asset holdings: it has embarked on what you might call  QT  (T for tightening). Given the sizeable impact of QE, including in the US, you might have expected this to result in a material rise in bond yields, especially at a time when the US government is also starting to sell more debt. The first column in Chart  gives you some idea of the predicted effect on this basis. It takes the median projection for the decline in the size of its balance sheet over the next three years (as calculated by the New York Fed). It then multiplies that by the estimated response of Treasury yields, per dollar of purchases, in the first phase of QE. In the event, things have turned out rather differently. Despite the various QT announcements in the first nine months of last year (and despite rising short rates and easier fiscal policy) yields actually fell over that period (the right-hand bar). That, of course, might be due to any number of other influences. But even if you focus on the particular points at which the policy was communicated (the middle bar) there was essentially no reaction in the government bond market. ###newline###  One thing that might have amplified QE s impact when it was first used was its sheer novelty value. Once markets discover the policy is feasible, perhaps the premium required for holding longer-term bonds is permanently lowered, if only to a small extent. But there are potentially more important reasons why the later rounds of QE   and in particular the early stages of QT   have had smaller effects. These are connected with the various ways in which QE actually works. To understand why, it s worth stepping back and reminding ourselves what the mechanics of the policy actually are. QE is sometimes described as  printing money . That can be a helpful piece of shorthand. It can also be a misleading one. It risks giving the impression that the central bank simply hands out wads of cash, getting nothing in return. I ve often heard, in particular, that QE involves  giving  money to the banks. What actually happens is this (there s a stylised depiction at the back of this speech): the central bank buys government bonds, mainly from non-banks, on the open market. Imagine we pay for them with a cheque. The seller of the gilt lodges the cheque at its own commercial bank, increasing the size of its deposit holdings;  that commercial bank, in its turn, sends the cheque back to us, increasing its deposits at the central bank (so-called  reserves ). And there s no direct effect on anyone s net financial position. The seller of the gilt ends up with more money in its bank account but no change in its total assets. The two banks, of the commercial and central variety, end up with larger balance sheets but the rises in assets and liabilities are of equal size. So perhaps a more accurate description of the process is that it replaces one liability of the consolidated public sector (longer-term government bonds) with another (deposits at the central bank). The effect is to depress the average maturity of those consolidated liabilities. And you might wonder, especially since both bonds and reserves pay interest, why this should do anything at all.  Indeed, there s a famous neutrality result in finance, originally applied to corporate balance sheets, that says exactly this. Under certain conditions, when financial markets are functioning smoothly, pure financial transactions of this sort do nothing. At least in this idealised theoretical setting, it makes no difference to its overall cost of capital if a firm issues interest-bearing debt and buys back its own shares. The maturity profile of government debt wouldn t matter for bond yields. And, viewing central bank money simply as the shortest-maturity liability that the public sector can issue, nor would those yields respond to open-market operations by the central bank (QE). This is what Ben Bernanke was getting at when he quipped that QE is something that  works in practice but doesn t work in theory . potential  signalling  effect   says what matters is what QE says about the central bank s intentions regarding future policy, and in particular the likely path of official interest rates. The point I want to make here is that all three can change. One might even say this is intrinsic to the effects involved. The first two   the  bank lending  and  portfolio balance  channels   rely, in their different ways, on markets being sufficiently imperfect that the neutrality result no longer applies. But markets are more impaired at some times than others. Before the crisis, many financial assets were considered liquid. They could be easily traded, prices were readily quoted and investors would happily switch between them, even in response to relatively small changes in their relative price. The demand for central bank money was lower   why would you need it if liquidity was easily available elsewhere?   and  preferred habitats  weaker. In that environment, shifts in the central bank s balance sheet may not have had much effect. It was when things started to seize up, and markets became more dysfunctional, that these transactions really mattered. With fewer assets considered liquid, the demand for central bank money went up. With preferred habitats more entrenched, the effect of asset purchases on prices were larger. You might therefore have expected QE, at least through these channels, to have become more important. Conversely, you might also expect their impact to diminish once more normal market conditions are restored. While he was on the MPC my former colleague David Miles gave a very clear and more detailed explanation of this point (Miles ()). As for the third, it surely makes sense that the strength of the  signalling effect    what markets infer from QE decisions about future interest rates, and the central bank s intentions regarding its overall policy stance   depends on what it communicates alongside its decision. In the early phases of QE the policy was seen as an aggressive attempt to ease monetary conditions for an extended period. Whatever else it might have done to depress the  term premium    the extra yield required by long-maturity bondholders, even above their expectations of future short-term interest rates   it also lowered those rate expectations. QE and forward interest rates were effectively used in a complementary fashion, pushing in the same direction. In other words, rate rises and any tightening effect of shrinking the balance sheet should be seen as substitutes. More of the latter would mean less of the former, and the overall stance of policy   the balance sheet and official interest rates taken together   would be whatever it needed to be to meet the Fed s remit, given the economic conditions prevailing at the time. Compared with the  taper tantrum  episode this sent a different message about the overall stance of policy and I suspect that played a part in dampening the impact of QT announcements on longer-term bond yields. ###newline###  In time the QE will also start to be unwound in the UK. The MPC set out its basic framework for this process some time ago, in the November  Inflation Report. We said then that we would begin to start reducing the stock of QE only once the official Bank Rate had risen some way. This was partly because conventional policy is more flexible, better suited to responding to shorter-term economic fluctuations. It was also a response to the relatively higher degree of uncertainty about the effect of changes in the stock of QE. In principle, those disinflationary influences might include the process of QE unwind itself. To that extent, Bank Rate would be lower than it otherwise would have been. That s why we took care to add another sentence to last month s MPS:  Decisions on Bank Rate will take into account any impact of changes in the stock of purchased assets on overall monetary conditions, in order to achieve the inflation target . In some ways this is no more than the phrase  primary instrument of policy  implies. As long as they re free to do so, interest rates will always move around to offset things that affect inflation   in both directions, and wherever those influences come from. But we were also aware of the US experience and the Fed s careful communication around QT. ###newline###  QE has often been described as a  new-fangled  policy, something that involves  printing money  and has served only to engineer large rises in the prices of financial and other assets, benefiting only the better off. Broadly speaking I don t think any of these things is true. It s not new; it s not exactly printing money; equity and house prices are in real terms still comfortably below their pre-crisis levels; inequality hasn t risen   nor, according to the most detailed analysis available, did easier monetary policy have any net impact on it. To be sure, asset prices would probably have fallen further had QE and other measures not been put in place in . The same goes for the economy itself. As far as we can tell, asset purchases provided significant support to aggregate demand, even if it wasn t enough to offset fully the extended contractionary effects of the crisis. Perhaps Friedman and Schwartz over-emphasised the failures of the US Fed as a cause of the Great Depression. But I don t think anyone can reasonably argue it was worth risking those same mistakes a second time. Later rounds of QE may have been less effective than the first. In the US, where the Fed has begun to shrink its balance sheet, its  QT  announcements appear to have had very little impact. At least in part, that s likely to be by design. The pace of unwind is very gradual. And the FOMC emphasised that, to the extent a shrinking balance sheet tightened monetary conditions the official interest rate would be commensurately lower (than it would otherwise have been). The overall stance of policy would be set to ensure the central bank meets its objectives. The same is true here. Our task remains to hit the inflation target and we will always seek to ensure that the combined effects of the APF and of more conventional changes in Bank Rate are set to that end.