 I would like to thank Will Abel, Thomas Belsham, Ben Broadbent, Matthew Corder, Clare Macallan, Rebecca Maule, Chris Redl, Silvana Tenreyro, Alex Tuckett for their help in preparing this speech. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the other members of the Monetary Policy Committee I want to make four main points in this speech. First, in my view, the labour market currently seems likely to tighten more this year than the external consensus expects, with further declines in unemployment and under-employment. Second, recent data support the view that the equilibrium jobless rate is lower than it used to be. Even so, the elevated level of labour shortages across a wide range of industries suggests there is no longer significant labour market slack. Third, the tightening labour market and rising recruitment difficulties probably will lift pay growth this year a bit above the recent subdued trends. Fourth, the economic outlook may change significantly   either way   as and when there is greater clarity over the UK s economic relations with the EU and any transition to that end-state. Unemployment has fallen steadily for over six years, with the jobless rate down from the peak of .% in  to just .% late last year, the lowest since . Under-employment, which initially fell more slowly than unemployment, also has fallen markedly in recent years (see figure ). The view of the external consensus is that this decline in unemployment is now probably over, and that unemployment is likely to stabilise or rise slightly this year. But my hunch is that the labour market will probably tighten further this year, with the jobless rate dropping to -- and perhaps even below -- % during , alongside further declines in under-employment. This difference in outlook partly reflects my view that the economy and labour demand are likely to hold up a bit better than many expect, and partly reflects the prospect that workforce growth   and hence potential growth   may be weaker than generally expected. To be sure, recent data show a slight drop in employment over the last three months. However, wider labour market trends do not look weak in my view. For example, surveys suggest that firms  hiring intentions are slightly above average (see figure ), while the level of job vacancies is around a record high. The employment data are quite volatile from quarter to quarter, and the recent dip may just be a correction from the unusually strong gains in prior months. More broadly, business surveys suggest that the economy will probably continue to grow at  % -% near term (see figure ), similar to the last year or two, and a little above the external consensus. Within that outlook, consumer spending is likely to remain fairly sluggish, balanced by buoyant exports and a modest gain in investment. There are headwinds to growth. For example, households and businesses   both inside and outside the UK   expect that Brexit will damage the economy over coming years (see figures ,  and ). These expectations are probably already having some impact on activity, especially investment and housing. These expectations have also squeezed consumers  real incomes, through the inflation triggered by the Brexit-related depreciation of sterling. Even though inflation has probably peaked, the adjustment to that real income squeeze will probably still restrain spending in . First, global growth is buoyant, with broad-based expansion across the US, EU and Asia, and marked upturns in world trade and investment. All this, plus the extra boost from sterling s depreciation since , is supporting exports, business confidence and asset prices in the UK. Second, overall corporate and household balance sheets in the UK have improved significantly in recent years, with lower debt levels (relative to income) and higher holdings of liquid assets. Banks are better capitalised and hence more resilient. Money and credit are growing steadily, more or less in line with nominal GDP. Third, background drivers are in place for a cyclical upturn in business investment, with the high return on capital, low cost of capital, and high capacity use. Even with Brexit uncertainties, business surveys suggest that investment intentions are around average. Fourth, fiscal headwinds are likely to be more gradual than previously envisaged, following the late- Autumn Budget. Fifth, monetary conditions remain supportive, with low interest rates and reasonable credit availability. There is little sign that the recent bp hike has triggered an outsized reaction from households, businesses and financial markets. Consumer confidence and business activity are little changed, the yield curve remains relatively flat and, with the decline in lending spreads over recent years, fixed mortgage rates remain lower than - years ago (see figure ). As a result, many people that currently have a fixed rate mortgage would probably not face a rise in borrowing costs if they now had to replace that mortgage with a new loan. Balancing out the positives and negatives, the nearterm outlook for the economy is not great, but nor is it terrible. And even modest growth may well exceed the economy s diminished rate of potential growth. To put it differently, economic growth of around  -% YoY may (as over the last year) be enough to tighten the labour market significantly further. Most estimates suggest that UK potential growth has slowed from around  % per year in the pre-crisis period to about  % per year recently. If anything, I suspect that it may now be even lower, due to slower workforce growth. The decline in UK potential growth to around  % in recent years has reflected lower productivity growth, which averaged just .% per year over - versus .% YoY on average in -. Productivity growth also slowed in the US and euro area. But potential growth in those countries also has been reduced by lower workforce growth, partly reflecting demographics, as well as (in some cases) other factors including hysteresis from persistent high unemployment. By contrast, UK workforce growth has (until recently) remained around  % per year, similar to the pre-crisis average and roughly twice the average pace in the euro area (see figure ). Since , the UK s relatively high pace of workforce growth has largely been driven by inflows of foreign workers, especially from other EU countries: the aggregate contribution to workforce growth from people born in the UK has been close to zero (see figure ). The boost to labour supply from inward migration in the UK has been well above the EU average. However, the growth of the foreign-born workforce in the UK has slowed sharply in recent quarters, especially people from other EU countries. Over -, inflows of people born in other EU countries added .pp per year on average to UK workforce growth: that boost has now fallen to roughly zero. This has played a major role in reducing overall UK workforce growth from .% YoY in  to just .% YoY in late , the latest data. The slowdown in foreign worker inflows seems to reflect reduced labour supply   with citizens of other EU countries less willing to work in the UK -- rather than reduced demand for labour in the UK. Reports from the Bank s regional agents and business surveys highlight Brexit-related uncertainties, for example over future job opportunities, benefit eligibility and health cover in the UK. Moreover, sterling s Brexit-related depreciation has reduced incentives to work in the UK   especially for people intending to send money home There may also be an impact from stronger growth and reduced slack elsewhere, especially in the countries that until recently saw outflows of workers. For the EU as a whole, unemployment is at a -year low, and the share of firms that report output is constrained by labour shortages is at a record high   with very high readings in the A countries (see figure ). Wage growth in the A countries has picked up markedly. Even Germany, which obviously is not leaving the EU, has seen a sharp slowdown in the number of citizens from other EU countries in its workforce. Prospects for migration flows are uncertain. But my own view is that, given the tightening in labour markets elsewhere and ongoing Brexit uncertainties, net inflows from EU countries to the UK workforce in coming years will remain much lower than in recent years. I would not be surprised if they turn negative   ie more people leave than arrive -- at some stage. It seems unlikely that the reduction in labour supply growth from lower net inflows of foreign workers will be fully offset by a rise in participation rates. The UK participation rate is already around a record high, and the number of people that are not counted in the workforce but say they would like a job is around a record low. With reduced workforce growth, productivity growth would need to pick up substantially to keep potential economic growth at around  % YoY. There is little sign of this at present. Productivity did rise markedly in Q in QoQ terms -- the flipside of the drop in employment noted earlier. But this followed a couple of very weak quarters for productivity. The YoY pace, at .%, is similar to the subdued trends of recent years. I do not believe that the UK is inevitably locked into persistent low productivity growth. Technological innovation remains high and there is ample scope for UK productivity to catch up to the higher levels elsewhere, for example, the US and Germany. However, the route to a sustained pickup in productivity growth probably relies on higher levels of investment and training. At present, there is little sign that these are changing dramatically. Moreover, the drop in inward migration seems to be adversely affecting workforce quality, which may cap future productivity gains. Over -, the number of graduates in the UK workforce rose by an average of .% YoY, somewhat above the EU average (.% YoY). Roughly one third of that rise in the UK reflected foreign citizens. Now, with reduced foreign worker inflows, the number of graduates in the UK workforce is up just .% YoY (Q , latest data), the lowest growth since quarterly data began in  and among the lowest of any EU country (see figure ). All this points to the possibility that UK potential growth may now be below  %. For example, the OECD estimates euro area potential growth at around %. The UK and euro area have had similarly low rates of productivity growth in recent years. The difference in potential growth reflects the greater boost to the UK workforce from inward migration. Take this away and, unless UK productivity growth rises markedly, UK potential growth would be similar to the meagre euro area pace. I stress that monetary policy can do very little to lift trends in potential growth or productivity growth. Of course, the drop in foreign worker inflows reduces demand in the economy as well as supply. For example, it is likely to already be hitting consumer spending, with an impact roughly proportionate to the drop in workforce growth. However, the adverse effects on overall GDP may not necessarily be as immediate. The impact on investment may be bigger or smaller, depending on the extent to which foreign workers are a complement or a substitute for the capital stock. And lower workforce growth probably only affects exports through a gradual process of capacity constraints and upward pressures on pay   which will eventually reduce demand for UK exports to match the reduced potential supply   rather than the immediate effects that would be likely for consumer spending. Either way, the signs so far are that the economy as a whole is growing steadily despite this headwind. Overall, I suspect that   in line with business surveys   the economy will probably continue to grow steadily at around its recent pace, and as a result the labour market will tighten further. The economy currently seems to have limited slack. Business surveys, including the BoE Agents, suggest that staff recruitment difficulties have worsened over the last year   especially for skilled and professional staff -- and are similar to pre-crisis peaks (see figure ). Unemployment is low by historic norms, with short-term unemployment at a record low. The net balance of people wanting to work more hours has fallen close to zero. Consistent with this, inflation among CPI components that are driven chiefly by domestic factors is close to a target-consistent pace, assuming a normal trend in import prices. From this starting point, my hunch is that further tightening in the labour market is likely to cause underlying pay growth to pick up from about  % recently to about % this year and probably a little higher next year. Now, I am fully aware that pay growth has repeatedly undershot the forecasts of the MPC and external consensus in recent years. This has led some people to argue that the wage Phillips curve   the theory that lower unemployment will lift pay growth   is effectively dead or flat, with the result that falling unemployment produces little or no upward effect on pay growth. However, I still think the wage Phillips curve is a useful framework, especially if broadened to include trends in productivity growth and inflation expectations. Various factors have probably shifted the UK Phillips curve down in recent years   implying lower pay growth for a given jobless rate. These factors include wider education attainment, changes to the tax and benefit system, the spread of less secure forms of employment, more widespread under-employment and so forth (see figure ). Recognising this, the MPC a year ago cut its estimate of the equilibrium jobless rate (U*) from % to  %. This would imply that the economy can probably operate with a lower unemployment rate than in the past. As I have said before, I consider it possible that the equilibrium jobless rate is slightly below  %. But I doubt it is very much lower. Pay growth in recent years has followed a path broadly consistent with a  % U* estimate, given trends in inflation expectations and productivity growth. The same holds for the latest data, for Q . The wage Phillips curve is also intact at a regional level, although there is tentative evidence that it has flattened a bit in the last few years compared to estimates up to  or , such that wage growth reacts a bit less than previously to any given drop in unemployment (see figure ). It appears to me that the Phillips curve has shifted, but not vanished. Moreover, pay growth during  probably has not fully reflected the recent labour market tightening. First, YoY pay growth typically reacts to changes in the jobless rate with a lag of several quarters. As such, pay trends in  probably tell us more about labour market slack in  than in . And these lags may currently be a little longer than usual. For several years, the recession left a hangover of caution and job insecurity, which limited the extent to which people moved job for slightly better pay. In turn, the relatively low level of job-to-job moves in recent years has probably reduced the extent to which firms feel pressure to raise pay to retain staff. This has led to an unusually wide gap between pay growth for job movers (.% YoY on average in -, similar to the pre-crisis norm) and for those who stay in the same job (.%, well below the pre-crisis norm), see figure . Anecdotally, firms report they must pay up for new hires but so far have to an extent been able to limit passing on the higher pay levels to existing staff. In recent quarters, the number of job-to-job moves has returned to something like the pre-crisis norm (see figure ). Over time, I would expect the tight labour market and wide gap in pay growth between job movers and job-stayers to encourage more people to move job and pressure firms to pay more to keep staff. Second, composition effects have been unusually negative in recent AWE data, cutting roughly .p off YoY pay growth in Q  (see figure ). The AWE data measure the average level of pay per person per week across a wide sample of firms and hence are affected by changes in the mix of employment between people or sectors with differing pay levels. Composition effects have become increasingly counter-cyclical in recent years   in other words, more negative when unemployment is falling -- especially those relating to the age, qualifications and tenure of staff. In my view, if one is looking at changes in pay growth as a guide to changes in cost and inflation pressures, it is useful to strip out such composition effects, because they probably have a similar effect on productivity and hence leave unit labour cost growth unaffected. Excluding composition effects, pay growth is already close to % YoY. Composition effects may well continue to reduce average earnings growth in  if, as I suspect, unemployment continues to edge down. Nevertheless, unless composition effects increase further from the recent high pace, they will not be enough to prevent AWE growth from moving higher if underlying pay growth picks up further. Third, pay growth in recent years has understated the rise in total labour costs, with large rises in non-wage costs, including national insurance taxes, contributions to DB pension schemes, auto enrolment, the Apprentice Levy and so forth (see figure ). Even with subdued pay growth, overall unit labour cost growth in the last couple of years averaged about  % YoY, similar to the pre-crisis average. This pace is probably roughly consistent with the inflation target over time, assuming a normal trend in import prices. Some non-wage costs, eg lump sum contributions to a closed DB pension scheme, are probably best viewed as fixed costs rather than marginal costs and are unlikely to have much influence on wages or prices. But some, eg auto enrolment, are akin to deferred compensation and probably do affect firms  marginal costs and prices. To the extent that firms and workers view such non-wage costs as part of overall compensation, increases in non-wage costs may also have had some dampening effect on pay growth. Looking ahead, auto enrolment costs will continue to rise for many firms in -. If the growth of non-wage costs were to remain high, then it would be ever more important to keep an eye on total labour cost growth rather than just average earnings. Moreover, while high inward migration has not significantly reduced overall pay levels in recent years, the ample availability of foreign workers may, until very recently, have limited somewhat the extent to which pay growth responds to low UK unemployment. When both firms and workers know it is still relatively easy to hire people from outside the UK for jobs in the UK, the appropriate measure of slack widens to encompass all potential applicants for jobs in the UK, including people currently outside the UK. This wide concept of slack is difficult to measure but, until recently, has probably been relatively high despite low unemployment in the UK. As a result, the Phillips curve measured against UK unemployment may have appeared relatively flat (and/or perhaps a lower U*). With availability of foreign workers now apparently declining   partly reflecting reduced external slack   skill shortages are becoming more acute and low UK unemployment may have a greater influence on UK pay growth, in effect reviving and re-steepening the wage Phillips curve. To be sure, pay growth in  is likely to stay well below the pre-crisis norm of % or so. But, I suspect it is more likely to overshoot than undershoot the external consensus (which is for AWE growth of .% in  and .% in ). The Nov- IR projected pay growth to pick up to around % in  as a whole. Even with some pick up in productivity, such a trend would probably signal the likelihood that CPI inflation will stay above target over time once the direct boost to inflation from sterling s depreciation fades. Indeed, pay growth in  could rise above % YoY, especially if composition effects unwind and underlying pay growth picks up further. Let me turn to Brexit. The MPC s economic forecasts are based upon a range of possible longrun outcomes for the UK s trading relations with the EU and elsewhere, and assume the economy adjusts smoothly over a number of years. To be clear, our forecasts do not explicitly assume a particular length of transition period, still less what the details of that transition might be. But regardless of that, what matters for the economy right now and in the future are the collective expectations of households, business and financial markets rather than the MPC s assumptions. So far these private sector expectations seem broadly consistent with our assumption of a reasonably smooth adjustment and modest longrun adverse effects on the economy. And, as noted earlier, anticipation of these effects seems to be already dampening economic activity to an extent. It is possible that the expectations of households, business and markets will move around in coming months in response to twists and turns in the Brexit negotiations. As we have said, the MPC will not be giving a running commentary on the state of negotiations. But in our economic forecasts we will, of course, be sensitive to observed changes in business and consumer confidence, as well as financial markets, in this period. As and when there is greater clarity on the UK s eventual trading relations with the EU, and any transition period, then those decisions -- and any resultant changes in private sector expectations and asset prices -- could well affect the economy s prospects, including growth, potential growth and inflation, in a material way. These effects could go either way. ###newline###  In the exceptional circumstances since the EU referendum, the MPC is   consistent with our remit -- aiming for an appropriate tradeoff between the speed with which inflation returns to target and the extent of spare capacity. If the prospective terms of that tradeoff change, then it is natural for monetary policy to respond. I stress that monetary policy is driven far more by inflation prospects over the next - years than the actual inflation rate over the latest  months. If the economy turns out broadly in line with the outlook I have described   labour market tightness and signs of higher pay growth -- I consider it likely that interest rates will need to rise further over time. As with other MPC members, I expect that any further tightening will be limited and gradual. But I am not going to pre-announce how I might vote at any particular future MPC meeting. There is plenty of data to see and analysis to do before we get to that. In particular, the February Inflation Report will include the results of our annual supply stock-take, which will include consideration of prospects for productivity, equilibrium unemployment, migration and labour supply. There is considerable uncertainty over the exact level of interest rates that is neutral, but I am fairly confident that we are below that level at present, especially if one allows for the stimulus from the stock of asset purchases. It follows that a modest further rise in rates would still imply a shift towards neutral, rather than an outright move to a restrictive policy stance. We would be gradually lifting our foot off the accelerator, with no need to put the brakes on. But the path of monetary policy is not preset. In particular, consistent with our remit, the MPC has said that any monetary policy implications from Brexit developments would not be automatic, and would depend on changes in supply, demand and the exchange rate. It is certainly not correct to assume that  good  or  bad  Brexit news automatically implies that interest rates must go in a particular direction. The MPC has tools to respond either way as needed to changes in the economic outlook.