 Ten years ago, in this very room, Robin Leigh Pemberton (then Governor, now Lord Kingsdown), delivered the first LSE-Bank of England Lecture. It was entitled  The Case for Price Stability . In the twenty-five years prior to that lecture, prices had risen by over %, more than over the previous two hundred and fifty years. So the audience on that evening in November  had grown up in a world in which rapidly rising prices appeared inevitable. They were the inflation generation.  To them price stability seemed remote. Inflation was simply taken for granted. But that LSE-Bank of England Lecture coincided with the introduction of a new monetary framework   the inflation target. Since then price stability has become a reality. Over the past decade inflation has averaged .%, and has been no lower than .% and no higher than .% Alan Greenspan defined price stability as when  expected changes in the average price level are small enough and gradual enough that they do not materially enter business and household decisions.  With inflation expected to remain close to .%, it is no longer a material concern to families and businesses in this country. Alan Blinder, who was Alan Greenspan s deputy at the Federal Reserve Board, put it even more clearly. Price stability, he said, was when ordinary people stop talking and worrying about inflation. And so successful has been the pursuit of low inflation that some commentators have talked about the  death of inflation  and others have become increasingly concerned about the prospect of deflation. Tonight I want to re-examine the case for price stability, and ask the following questions. Did the benefits of low inflation promised ten years ago materialise? Is the case for price stability the same as in ? What does price stability mean in ###newline###  Since Britain s departure from the Exchange Rate Mechanism in September , monetary policy has been based on an explicit numerical target for the rate of inflation now .%   and a high degree of transparency and accountability. Indeed, it was in his LSE lecture that Lord Kingsdown announced that the first Inflation Report would appear in February . And last week s Report completes exactly a decade of Inflation Reports   forty assessments of the outlook for growth and inflation in the British economy. Although inflation targeting in the United Kingdom is now ten years old, the most significant institutional changes occurred five years ago. Decisions on interest rates were taken out of the political arena in May  and delegated by the Chancellor to the new Monetary Policy Committee. It is too soon to compare the nine-member Monetary Policy Committee with the Council of Nine that ruled Siena during the fourteenth century. Exactly  years before the Chancellor created the MPC, the Council of Nine commissioned Lorenzetti to paint the marvellous frescoes in the Palazzo Pubblico showing the virtues of Good Government and the vices of Bad Government. There are few more convincing representations of the case for stability than those frescoes. Since the MPC has not, at least yet, discovered a modern Lorenzetti, I shall present the case for price stability in a more orthodox, if less compelling, visual form. Chart  shows consumer price inflation in this country over the past fifty years. The decade of inflation targeting stands out as a period of low and stable inflation. Table  shows that not only has inflation been lower since inflation targeting was introduced, but that, as measured by its standard deviation, it has also been more stable than in recent decades. Moreover, inflation has been less persistent   in the sense that shocks to inflation die away more quickly   under inflation targeting than for most of the past century.  Now this fall in inflation has led to sharp reductions in nominal interest rates, at both short and long time horizons, as shown in Table . That reflects both lower inflation expectations and smaller risk premia to compensate for future inflation uncertainty. The total inflation premium   the sum of expected inflation and the inflation risk premium   is measured by the difference between yields on conventional and index- linked government securities. Chart  shows that the total inflation premium fell significantly on the announcement of Bank of England independence and the creation of the MPC. It is highly suggestive of a fall not just in expected inflation but also in the inflation risk premium. In principle, the behaviour of businesses and households depends on real interest rates   nominal interest rates less the expected increase in prices. To the extent that the inflation risk premium falls, then so too does the level of real interest rates. The evidence in Chart  suggests that real rates have fallen too, although by less than nominal rates. So price stability appears to have led to a more stable macro economic environment, with fewer surprises to inflation, less inflation uncertainty, and a lower level of real interest rates. Has this improved nominal performance led to greater stability of the real economy? Table  shows that since , output has grown at a little above its forty year average, and has been much more stable than before. The standard deviation of quarterly growth rates over the past decade was less than half that in earlier periods. Can these gains in terms of greater stability be attributed to a more stable monetary regime? After all, a sceptic might argue that the causation runs from a more stable economic environment to lower inflation. But some of these alternative explanations, such as the rise in the share of services in total output and better inventory management, are part of longer-term trends and do not fit well with the observation that volatility has fallen sharply over the past decade. And shocks to the UK from the world economy and from the sterling real exchange rate have been as large, if not larger, over the past five years as in earlier periods. It is, of course, difficult to identify the effect of changes in the monetary policy regime on the path of total output. One approach is to consider long runs of data which make it easier to identify structural breaks in the behaviour of output. Luca Benati of the Bank of England has been investigating the statistical properties of inflation over long periods for a number of countries. He finds that changes in the behaviour of inflation appear broadly to coincide with changes in the monetary policy regime. Some tentative evidence that this general conclusion applies to the UK can be found in the behaviour of ten-year forward interest rates on UK government bonds. At this horizon, high and variable interest rates are signs of high expected inflation and a large inflation risk premium. As shown in Chart , the ten-year forward interest rate has fallen significantly in recent years, and has been less variable since inflation targeting, and especially the MPC, were introduced. What is the mechanism by which monetary policy contributes to a more stable economy?  I would argue that monetary policy is now more systematic and predictable than before. Inflation expectations are anchored to the .% target. Businesses and families expect that monetary policy will react to offset shocks that are likely to drive inflation away from target. In the jargon of economists, the  policy reaction function  of the Bank of England is more stable and predictable than was the case before inflation targeting, and easier to understand. More simply, monetary policy is not adding to the volatility of the economy in a way that it did in earlier decades. ###newline###  The costs of departing from price stability   either inflation or deflation   depend upon whether it is expected or comes as a surprise. In his  lecture, Lord Kingsdown distinguished three costs of unanticipated inflation and four of anticipated inflation. I shall focus on the former, commenting on the latter only briefly. Although none of the ideas are new, research since  has thrown new light on both the theoretical and the empirical relevance of the costs of inflation. The main costs of unanticipated inflation are: ###newline###  The crucial link between price stability and production and investment is that high inflation is associated with more volatile and uncertain inflation. I showed earlier that as inflation has fallen in Britain, so too has its variability. The same link can be seen in cross-section data. Chart  shows the relationship between average inflation and its variability, measured by its coefficient of variation, over different time horizons for a sample of  countries. In all cases it is clear that inflation uncertainty increases with the average inflation rate. But does this link between inflation and its volatility mean that higher inflation results in greater variability of relative prices? Chart  provides the answer for the UK. For each (approximate) decade for which the data on  sub-components of the retail prices index are available, the chart shows the relationship between the standard deviation of those relative prices and the inflation rate in each month.  At low inflation rates, say up to % a year, it appears that it is the absolute value of changes in relative prices that is linked to the inflation rate. This would be the case, as in Britain recently, where changes in relative prices, whether up or down, were largely responsible for short-term fluctuations in the inflation rate around a relatively stable long run level. Variability in relative prices might lead inflation to be either above or below the inflation target, but not systematically in one direction or the other. Increases in house prices move the inflation rate up and falls in oil prices move it down. In both cases, an increase in the variability of relative prices leads to movements of inflation away from the target, but not in a systematic direction. But at higher rates of inflation (or deflation) the deviation of inflation from zero is positively correlated with the variability of relative prices. Hence, outside a range close to price stability, the higher the inflation rate, the greater is the variability of relative prices. So inflation makes it more difficult for firms and households to work out whether the prices of the products they buy and sell have changed relative to other goods, or whether there has been a change in the overall price level. Such confusion can lead firms to produce, at least temporarily, the wrong level of output. And if many firms make these mistakes at the same time then the result is an unnecessary fluctuation in aggregate output. Another decision affected by uncertainty about prices is investment. Many investments are specific to a particular model or product, and so they become sunk costs. For such irreversible investments it may pay to wait before investing since time will resolve some of the uncertainty. A Premiership football team may decide to postpone the construction of a new stadium until their survival in the League is assured. Or a car manufacturer may postpone a decision about opening a new plant to see if a rise in demand is temporary or appears likely to last. And that uncertainty could stem from a difficulty in disentangling relative from absolute prices. In the language of finance, there is an option value to waiting when there is uncertainty about the returns on an irreversible investment. So a project must offer a rate of return sufficient not only to cover the cost of financing of the project, but also the option value to waiting. That may explain why surveys of firms show that their hurdle rates of return are often well in excess of the cost of either equity or debt finance. For example a CBI survey last year found that the average real hurdle rate for UK firms was .%   down from rates of around % in surveys conducted in    but still well above the cost of financial capital. If uncertainty about inflation creates an option value to waiting, then it will reduce investment. And there is growing empirical evidence that inflation is a key explanatory variable for cross-country differences in investment to output ratios. ###newline###  Unexpected changes in the price level   the standard of value used to define contracts produce arbitrary redistributions of wealth. As Keynes wrote in his powerful advocacy of price stability in A Tract on Monetary Reform,  We leave saving to the private investor. We leave the responsibility for setting production to the business man. These arrangements have great advantages. But they cannot work properly if the money, which they assume as a stable measuring-rod, is undependable. Unemployment, the precarious life of the worker, the disappointment of expectation, the sudden loss of savings, the profiteer   all proceed, in large measure, from the instability of the standard of value . Or, as Lenin remarked, the best way to destroy capitalism is to debauch the currency. It is arguable as to whether it is high inflation or serious deflation which results in the greater economic damage. In Europe in the s hyperinflation undermined economic and social arrangements, as it has done more recently in Latin America. But deflation has proved just as unpopular as inflation. In  A.D. the Roman Emperor Aurelian tried to restore the integrity of the coinage which had been adulterated by workmen in the Mint. Aurelian exchanged good money for bad, and ordered the destruction of accounts drawn up in the devalued currency. In the long run the operation restored the value of money. But in the short run it caused hardship. Gibbon, in his Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, observed that  a temporary grievance of such a nature can scarcely excite and support a serious civil war . Unfortunately, taking a different and more Keynesian view that in the long run we are all dead, the population at the time rose in insurrection. Many of them found that they were dead in the short run as well, with seven thousand soldiers and countless civilians perishing during the suppression of the uprising. So let us consider the costs of wealth redistributions arising from unanticipated deflation. Such redistributions can lower aggregate demand. Why? Since it is difficult either to borrow or insure against uncertain future employment and earnings opportunities, current assets act as a buffer stock to make it possible to smooth consumption in the face of shocks to future prospects. When net worth is small it is risky to run down the buffer stock even further, and so the marginal propensity to spend out of wealth is much higher for households with low net worth than for families whose assets comfortably exceed their liabilities. If significant numbers of debtors have little net worth   recent first-time house-buyers with high debt-to-value ratios are a prime example   then an unanticipated deflation could cause a sharp fall in aggregate consumption spending. Such effects can be amplified if spending   consumption or investment   depends on the value of the assets that are used as collateral for loans. A fall in prices can produce a vicious circle in which the initial fall in demand lowers asset prices, reducing the value of collateral, which in turn leads borrowers to repay debt, exacerbating the original decline in aggregate demand. This  debt deflation  was first formulated clearly by Irving Fisher in the s, and has recently been revived in a more sophisticated form by Nobu Kiyotaki and John Moore, here at the London School of Economics. Because deflations are, fortunately, few and far between, there is a lack of hard empirical evidence on the quantitative significance of debt deflation. In , I argued that the depth of the recession in the UK and the US in the early s was the result of debt deflation. Consumption fell more sharply than would have been expected given movements in incomes and interest rates, reflecting an unexpected fall in inflation and asset prices. The effects on consumption of negative equity in housing were particularly severe. The experience of Japan may add to our knowledge in this area, although, as shown in Chart , despite a stagnant economy over the past decade, deflation of consumer prices has not been especially large. And I am confident that all central banks will do their best to prevent the sample size of countries suffering from serious deflation from increasing. ###newline###  As we have seen, high inflation goes hand in hand with greater uncertainty about   future inflation. Inflation is, therefore, associated with a positive risk premium to compensate investors for that uncertainty.  The longer the time horizon, the greater the risk premium is likely to be. That discourages long-term contracts and interest rates in such contracts will often depend upon future spot interest rates. Floating-rate mortgages are a good example. With a floating-rate mortgage the borrower is exposed to the risk of sharp fluctuations in the proportion of income that is devoted to debt service, as many households in Britain still remember from the late s when interest rates doubled to %. Fixed-rate mortgages eliminate that risk, but at the cost of introducing a new risk: the real value of the outstanding debt may change relative to the value of the house. John Campbell and Jo o Cocco () have suggested that a superior contract would be a fixed-rate mortgage where the principal was index-linked. That would reduce both income and capital risk. For whatever reason the market has not generated many private-sector index-linked contracts, despite the encouragement of high inflation in the past. Perhaps that is because the risks are generated not by some exogenous process, but by policy decisions. In any event, price stability is a good alternative to indexation. The move from a regime of high inflation to one of price stability can have consequences which again are best illustrated by the housing market.  A credible move to inflation targeting can bring down inflation expectations relatively quickly, even if with a lag. Chart  shows that inflation expectations, as measured by surveys, fell steadily following the introduction of inflation targeting, and are now anchored on the .% target. But a move to low inflation has other consequences that may be less easily understood. Price stability means lower nominal interest rates, and lower mortgage interest payments. It may also mean lower real interest rates if the inflation risk premium falls.  But the fall in nominal rates is likely to be much larger than the   fall in real rates. The lower mortgage payment largely reflects a rise in the effective duration of the loan because inflation no longer erodes the real value of the debt as quickly as before. In a low inflation world, nominal incomes rise more slowly than before and the real burden of servicing the debt persists. It may take longer for households to work out the impact of low inflation on real interest rates than to realise that the rate of increase of prices of everyday purchases has fallen. Learning takes time. One possible consequence of a slow adjustment to low inflation is that households may mistake too much of the reduction in nominal interest rates for a permanent fall in the real rate. As a result, asset prices are bid up to levels that prove unsustainable when learning finally occurs   and at the LSE you know that in time we do learn. How far this theoretical argument applies to the British housing market at present is difficult to say, but it demonstrates the risks from current house price to earnings ratios that are close to the peaks reached in the late s. So much for the costs of unanticipated inflation. What are the costs of anticipated inflation? Time permits me to comment only briefly on the four costs of anticipated inflation noted by Lord Kingsdown. ###newline###  Money   notes and coin   may no longer, as Sally Bowles claimed, make the world go round, but, even in a world of plastic, it oils the wheels of transactions. Cash still accounts for a large number of transactions, albeit a smaller fraction of the value of all transactions. The opportunity cost of holding cash is the interest rate on deposits. ###newline###  A second cost of anticipated inflation is the added inefficiencies that arise when an already distortionary tax system is incompletely indexed. Martin Feldstein () has edited a major study of the costs of incomplete indexation which includes a detailed analysis of the tax distortions to saving, consumption and investment in several major countries, and to which the Bank of England contributed. The benefit of reducing inflation in an already low inflation environment is estimated to be lower in the UK than in some other countries because some parts of the tax system are indexed. Nevertheless, the authors estimate that a reduction in inflation by  percentage points would bring an annual benefit equivalent to .% of GDP. That may sound small, but it is a large absolute number. Against that, the end of mortgage interest deductibility will have lowered the impact. ###newline###  A third distortion is that of front-loading of the real debt burden when debt contracts are fixed in nominal terms. Inflation reduces the amount that households borrow because it raises the cost of servicing the loan in the early years. In this way decisions on consumption and investment may be distorted. ###newline###  The costs of changing price lists and catalogues   so-called menu costs   are generally agreed to be of little direct consequence. But they may produce a degree of nominal rigidity in wages and prices which takes on greater significance. Inflation now causes relative price variability as not all firms are able to change their prices at the same time. The cost of greater relative price variability was discussed above, and continues to be an active field of research. Recent work at the Institute of Fiscal Studies () shows that when inflation is higher, there is a larger dispersion in the inflation rates faced by individual households. This finding points strongly to the role of nominal rigidities in contributing to relative price dispersion. ###newline###  So there is a strong case for price stability. But what does price stability mean in practice? Recall that the definitions of price stability offered by Alan Greenspan and Alan Blinder are rather general in nature and make no reference to particular indexes of prices or precise numbers for inflation. There are good reasons for this. The prices of the goods that I buy may rise at a different rate from the goods that you buy. Relative prices are always changing. And the basket of goods and services that you buy today is very different from the basket you could or would have bought fifty or a hundred years ago. The official retail price index now includes computers and cable TV, but no longer bowler hats or the price of admission to cricket matches. Information on prices of individual commodities in the past can be found in Harrods catalogues which were published from the mid-s until , catalogues for the Army and Navy Stores from  to , and the advertising records for Selfridges which go back to . To illustrate the problems of measuring inflation, I shall draw largely on historic price material kindly provided by Harrods   mainly the Catalogues, Harrods News, and Harrods Food News.  No records were published after , so we have supplemented the historical data by our own researches. And I am very grateful to the young Bank of England economist who was apprehended in the Food Hall, suspected of comparing prices for a competitor who was opening a store across the road. The richness of this information can be seen from the size of the Catalogue for    weighing over six pounds and containing  pages. In those days the telegraphic address of Harrods was  Everything, London . The Internet has nothing on Harrods in  when a telephone service with real people answering was available to take orders right through the night which were despatched early the next day with free local delivery (as far as Windsor) and by mail elsewhere. According to the catalogues, a record player in Harrods cost   in  (approximately   in today s money). That would have bought you a hand-cranked machine that provided low-quality sound.  Today, you could buy a record player for as little as   on the Internet, and at Harrods a better quality model for  . How much have record-players increased in price? Ignoring quality changes, the price rose by a factor of . (that is,  / ). But ignoring the vast quality improvements would surely overstate this increase   a quality change bias. So how do we quantify the increase in the quality of today s record player relative to the one in ? Statistically, there are a number of ways of dealing with this issue: one is to determine the price as a function of characteristics that do not change over time. The prime example of such hedonic pricing techniques in use today is for pricing computers, where the quality characteristics   performance in terms of speed and memory   can be fairly accurately measured. But hedonic pricing is not the only way to deal with this measurement issue, and recent research suggests that these techniques may overstate the extent to which quality has improved. Is a record player still the relevant product, since record players today are only used by a small group of enthusiasts of   now outdated   vinyl records? Perhaps a computer or CD (or DVD or MP) player is the relevant product today. From about   you can buy a CD player on the Internet today. This is a much more sophisticated piece of equipment than even today s record player, and its features are impossible to compare to those of a  record player. If we ignore the invention and marketing of new products, we introduce a new product bias. To illustrate the quality change and the new product bias, imagine that we go shopping in Harrods both today and in . Suppose that we are given   to spend   the same amount in both years. In  you could have bought a vacuum cleaner, a record player, an iron, a camera, and a telephone. The vacuum cleaner would have spread as much dust as it removed, the record player would have been hand-cranked and the iron would need to be filled with coal. The camera would have been bulky and awkward to set up, and the telephone would have been largely silent because so few people owned one. Today you can buy a similar bundle of goods for the same total outlay, but all would be of vastly superior quality. So for durable goods it is not clear that the cost of living has increased at all. But if we buy food, however, the results are very different. Unlike appliances, many of the food items in  are unchanged today   McVitie s digestive biscuits, Quaker oats, Rose s Lime Juice, Bournville cocoa, Frank Cooper s Oxford marmalade, Marmite, Heinz baked beans and Colman s mustard are only some of the familiar items for which precise comparisons over the years are possible. In  you could have fed yourself on p a day by eating Marmite on Hovis toast for breakfast; eggs, bacon and toast for lunch; Heinz beans on toast for dinner; with a pint of milk to drink. The same menu, consisting of exactly the same brand products, would cost A vacuum cleaner, if you wanted one in , cost  . That is more than  years worth of food based on the menu used in the previous example. A vacuum cleaner was an item of such luxury that owners would invite their friends round to  Hoover parties  to show off their prized possession. Over the years, the price of food increased in nominal terms by a factor of , but the price of vacuum cleaners stayed roughly the same.  Today you can still buy a vacuum cleaner for  .  But that is only  days of food shopping, rather than  years. As vacuum cleaners became cheaper relative to food, people bought more of them   ignoring such change would introduce a substitution bias. If there is any degree of substitutability between products, then rational consumers would have taken account of such changes in relative prices, and the weight of this particular good in the consumption bundle may have changed. The overall result of the substitution is that the expenditure share of electrical appliances has not changed much, at least not in the past  years. If we ignored the fact that vacuum cleaners were a rare luxury item in  and applied today s quantities to calculate the  consumption basket, we would greatly understate the increase in the average cost of living. And, of course, Harrods today is not exactly the typical place to go shopping   there was not much talk in  of suburban shopping centres, or of Internet shopping. Ignoring developments in retail practice introduces an outlet bias. Had the bias remained constant over the years, this would have been less of an issue for measuring retail price inflation, but it clearly has not. Quality change bias, new product bias, substitution bias and outlet bias   these are some of the issues that the Boskin Commission discussed in their report on measuring inflation in the United States. The finding of the report, which generated wide national and international interest, was that the US CPI might have overstated changes in the cost of living by between . and . percentage points per year. The examples I have given show how difficult it is to measure changes in the price level over time. Precision is not to be had. According to the official retail prices index, the general level of retail prices rose by a factor of  between  and .  But changes in the nature of the goods and services available, and the nature of retail selling, make such comparisons treacherous. Does this matter for price stability? Probably not. The Greenspan-Blinder definitions of price stability suggest that we know price stability when we see it, or rather, when we stop hearing about inflation. There is nothing mystical about the RPIX measure of inflation, nor the figure of .%. But it is important to have a precise numerical target which is easy to understand in order to provide an anchor for inflation expectations and to which the MPC can be held accountable. ###newline###  Although inflation targeting has delivered many of the benefits from low inflation that were promised ten years ago, there remain real challenges for monetary policy over the next decade. Two questions have been prominent recently. First, is inflation targeting enough? Second, is deflation, not inflation, the main threat at present? Is inflation targeting enough? Do rapid increases in asset prices pose a threat to stability, even though inflation targeting has delivered steady growth with low inflation? Some commentators have suggested that monetary policy target asset prices in addition to inflation.  But which asset prices, and what would that mean for interest rates? House prices have been rising rapidly, and as a ratio to average earnings have reached the previous peak in the late s. That might suggest that interest rates should have been higher. Sterling has for six years now been around % higher against the euro (or its predecessors) than before, the trade deficit has grown and the profitability of manufacturing has fallen by two-thirds. That might suggest that interest rates should have been lower. Equity prices rose by % between  and , before falling % subsequently. Presumably that would have implied first higher and then lower interest rates. What this means is that asset prices cannot sensibly be viewed in isolation, but only in the context of the economy as a whole. I believe that, although there are justifiable concerns about recent movements in asset prices, the policy dilemma can be analysed within the framework of inflation targeting that we have in the UK. No honest person actually knows the  equilibrium  level of asset prices. They are dominated by expectations of the prices that other investors will pay for those assets in future. The relevant uncertainties can rarely be quantified by observing the frequencies of events in the past. And the response of asset prices to changes in monetary policy is also unpredictable. So targeting asset prices directly is virtually impossible.  But changes in asset prices can have a major impact on levels of spending and the MPC devotes considerable time to the question of how such changes should affect policy. The immediate question is whether changes in asset prices have led to an imbalance within the economy that poses the risk of a large negative demand shock at some point in the future. I believe the answer is yes; but how big is that risk is extremely difficult to judge, and so the appropriate policy response is far from clear. Beneath the surface of overall stability in the UK economy lies a remarkable imbalance between a buoyant consumer and housing sector, on the one hand, and weak external demand, on the other. As a summary statistic of this imbalance, Table  shows that in the United Kingdom the growth of real domestic demand exceeded the growth of output by no less than  % over the five years to  Q, more than over any five year period in the s and more than in any other major country during the recent past. Even the optimistic Mr Micawber would realise that this cannot continue indefinitely. How then, and over what timescale, will these imbalances unwind? Three possibilities deserve consideration. First, the rapid growth in household consumption   averaging over % for the last five years   may reflect an adjustment to higher real disposable incomes. Consumption growth would then slow naturally as spending and debt reach their new levels. The imbalance between domestic demand and output would unwind as steadily as it built up, with no reason to fear a sudden correction. For this to occur the source of higher disposable incomes must be permanent.  In part the increase in recent years has resulted from the improved terms  of trade   % up on five years ago   which raise real national income for any given level of output.The main threat to the persistence of that improvement is the possibility of a fall in sterling that may be a necessary part of the rebalancing of the UK economy. It is very hard to assess the risk of that over any given time horizon. The second possibility is that the level of debt taken out by households   the debt-to-income ratio is now at an all-time high   makes households sensitive to any adverse future shock to their employment or income prospects. In that event the risk is of a sharper adjustment of consumption to the shock than might otherwise have occurred. Monetary policy would respond, but a large negative demand shock might result in an undershoot of the inflation target for some considerable time. The third possibility I touched on earlier. Households may adjust more quickly to the implications of a low inflation world for the prices of goods and services than for nominal interest rates or the future growth of nominal incomes. A mistaken underestimate of real interest rates or overestimate of nominal income growth may raise borrowing, spending and asset prices temporarily. Eventually households learn and consumption adjusts, again possibly sharply. The policy dilemma is that by allowing consumption and demand to grow rapidly there is a risk that there will be a sharp correction of demand later. The essence of the argument is well put by Borio and Lowe who, in a BIS Working Paper, argued that,  lowering rates or providing ample liquidity when problems materialise, but not raising them as imbalances build up, can be rather insidious in the longer run. They promote a form of moral hazard that can sow the seeds of instability and of costly fluctuations in the real economy . In practice it is difficult to know whether an  imbalance  does contain the seed of a future negative demand shock on a scale that would leave inflation below the target for some considerable time, or whether it will unwind of its own accord. The fact that growing imbalances might cause sharp deviations of inflation from target at some point in the future, raises the possibility of a trade off between deviations of inflation from target over the next year or so and deviations of inflation from target further ahead. That, I believe, is the right way to think about the challenge to monetary policy posed by asset price movements. Although there are no simple answers I hope I have shown that inflation targeting is enough, provided that one thinks carefully about the horizon over which policy can hope to affect inflation. The second challenge for monetary policy over the next decade is the possibility of deflation. That prices are now rising at the slowest rate for decades is, of course, a positive achievement of which the Bank is proud. But is the real threat now deflation? It is important to recognise that falling prices of manufactured goods is not the same as general deflation. In fact price stability, in the sense of an inflation rate overall of around  % a year, is likely to mean that the prices of manufactured goods will, on average, not rise at all. Faster productivity growth in manufacturing than in services, averaging around % over the last twenty years, means that the prices of services will rise faster than those of manufactured goods. And the rise in sterling over the past five years increased the difference between inflation rates in the two sectors. Table  shows the inflation rates for goods and services in the major economies. Positive rates of inflation for services, which account for around half of consumer spending, show deflation in most of the world economy is still some way off. In all countries over the past decade the gap between goods and services price inflation reflects productivity differences. That gap has widened somewhat in recent years as increasing competition from new producers has driven down prices of tradable goods. But the striking feature of the table is the extent to which the difference has increased to no less than . percentage points in the UK, much more than in the US where in turn the gap is larger than elsewhere. Exchange rate movements are largely responsible for these differences. The extent to which services inflation has risen relative to goods inflation is another manifestation of the imbalance within the UK economy. Deflation   in the sense of a sustained fall in the aggregate price level   can be found among the G economies only in Japan, where the consumer price level has been falling almost continuously for four years and by a cumulative total of %. That is why the framework introduced in  explicitly recognises that the MPC would not attempt to bring inflation back to the target immediately following a large shock. As a result inflation might deviate from the .% target by more than one Both challenges to policy in the future have one aspect in common:  they make us think carefully about the consequences of current policy for inflation well into the future. Asset prices raise the question of how far one should err on the side of caution while imbalances are building up. Deflation makes us aware of the risk that the zero lower bound on interest rates might bind in the future.  They imply that while, in  normal circumstances, monetary policy should focus on meeting the inflation target eighteen months or two years ahead, in practise it may be necessary to look even further ahead about the consequences of present actions. But that should not deflect monetary policy from its task of keeping inflation on track to meet the target in the medium term, in other words achieving price stability. ###newline###  When Lord Kingsdown addressed the LSE ten years ago, he said that departure from the Exchange Rate Mechanism, offered an opportunity    An opportunity to demolish the image of the United Kingdom as a second-rate inflation-prone economy . I believe that opportunity was taken. Today the UK has low and stable inflation.  And that has not come at the expense of either output or employment. Britain has now experienced  successive quarters of positive economic growth. And unemployment in this country is lower than in any other G country. This greater stability is no accident. It is the product of a commitment to price stability as reflected in an institutional design encompassing a clear inflation target and a transparent and accountable process for reaching decisions on interest rates embodied in the Monetary Policy Committee. At the beginning of my lecture I referred to the frescoes of Good and Bad Government by Lorenzetti. If today you go to the Palazzo Pubblico in Siena to see these wonderful paintings in the Sala della Pace, which I translate as the Room of Stability, you will see the results of allowing daylight to fall on the walls. Yes, greater transparency   more daylight   has damaged the paintings. But if you look carefully, you will see that whereas daylight has caused no harm to the paintings of Good Government, it has indeed damaged Bad Government on the opposite wall. Even today, Lorenzetti s frescoes tell us about the benefits of transparency and the importance of careful institutional design. Five years ago I delivered, again in this room, a lecture on the inflation target five years on. I argued that the new requirement on the Governor to write an open letter to the Chancellor whenever inflation deviated from target by more than one percentage point would provide ample opportunity for the Bank to restore the lost art of letter- writing. No letter has so far been required. But given Alan Blinder s definition of price stability   when ordinary people stop talking about inflation and converse instead about more important matters   I hope that the MPC, by remaining focussed on its task of meeting the inflation target, will be more successful in restoring the equally lost art of good conversation.  In that way the inflation generation will give  way to a new generation able to devote its energies to the wider economic and social policies from which our attention has so often been diverted by the need to control inflation. The lesson of the past ten years is that it is stability   price stability and the broader economic stability which it generates   that is the platform for the deeper satisfaction portrayed so well in Lorenzetti s frescoes. ###newline###  The total inflation premium is measured as the difference between implied forward nominal rates on conventional gilts ten years hence and implied real rates on index-linked gilts ten years hence. Source: Bank of England. ###newline###  Implied forward nominal rates on conventional gilts ten years hence, calculated on the last business day of the month. Source: Bank of England. ###newline###  Inflation is measured using the consumer price index excluding foodstuffs. The overnight interest rate is the nominal overnight uncollateralised call rate. Source: Thomson Financial Datastream. ###newline###  Inflation is the four quarter change in the RPI. Expected inflation is based on the quarterly Barclays Basix survey of inflation one year ahead. It is the weighted average across all surveyed sub-groups, excluding the general public. Expected inflation is lagged on year in the chart, so that expectations and outturns for the same period can be compared. Source: ONS and Basix. ###newline###  Growth rates are calculated as the total increase in output (and domestic demand, respectively) over the period  Q- Q, based on quarterly data, expressed as a four-quarter growth rate. Cumulative difference is the cumulative growth rate, expressed as a percentage, of output less domestic demand. Source: ONS (for UK data) and Thomson Financial Datastream (for data on the Euro Area, US and Japan). ###newline###  Inflation rates are calculated as the total increase in the price index over the indicated period, based on monthly data, expressed as a -month growth rate. Source: ONS (for UK data) and Thomson Financial Datastream (for data on the Euro Area, US and Japan).