 UK population growth over the last thirty-five years has been remarkably low in comparison with other countries; the population grew by just 7% between 1971 and 2004, less than all the other EU15 countries (except Germany), Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand and the United States, plus China and India. The rate of UK population growth  did exceed that of six countries from the former Soviet bloc (Czech Republic; Croatia; Estonia; Hungary; Latvia and Bulgaria), but was below the rates of growth of Poland, Lithuania, Slovakia and Slovenia. The UK population has grown at a faster pace since the turn of the millennium. This recent growth has been driven primarily  by changes in net migration.  Both the inflow  and outflow rates have risen, but the inflow rate has risen more rapidly recently, with an influx of migrants from eight East European (A8) countries. However, the increase in the net migration flow predates the influx of A8 migrants, reflecting a steady rise in the number of immigrants from Asia and the Middle East too. The propensity to migrate to the UK is higher the lower is GDP per capita in each of  the A8 countries. The decision is also strongly correlated with life satisfaction scores and unemployment rates, but is uncorrelated with employment rates or rates of inflation. There appears to be consistent evidence from the Worker Registration Scheme and National Insurance Number applications that approximately 500,000 migrants from the  A8 countries had come to work in the UK between May 2004 and late 2006. But other sources suggest a significant proportion of these workers have likely returned to their country of origin. The empirical literature from around the world suggests little or no evidence that immigrants have had a major impact on native labour market outcomes such as wages   and unemployment. Recent work by a number of other authors for the UK is also consistent with this view. The impact of recent migration from the A8 countries on the UK economy will be determined by the extent to which immigrants add to supply relative to demand, since it    is the balance between these two factors that determines prospects for  inflation.  We  argue that, at present, it appears that A8 immigration has tended to increase supply by more than it has increased demand in the UK (in the short run), and thereby acted to  reduce inflationary pressures. There seems to be broad agreement that immigration is likely to have reduced the natural rate of unemployment in the UK over the past few years. But there is some uncertainty about what has happened to the natural rate in the very recent past and what might happen to it in the near future. This is because immigration has not been the only shock to affect the labour market very recently. ###newline###  The recent rise in migration to the UK from eight EU Accession countries (the Czech Republic; Estonia; Hungary; Latvia; Lithuania; Poland; Slovakia; and Slovenia   the A8 countries) has generated a good deal of controversy. How many A8 immigrants are there  in the UK?  Where did they come from and when?  What impact has their influx had on  the UK economy and what likely impacts will they have in the future? Most importantly for the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), what macroeconomic effects have they had? ###newline###  According to official estimates published by the Office for National Statistics, the UK population grew by just 8.2% between 1971 and 2006, from 55.9 million to 60.5 million. In contrast, the United States population grew by 44.6% over the same period, from 207.7 million in 1971 to 300.3 million in 2006.2 Indeed population growth across many  countries has been greater than in the UK over the past three decades (Chart 1). Over the period 1971-2004, population growth in the UK ranks 31st out of 38 European and other large nations for which data are available (listed in Table 1, excluding Romania), with  only Germany (East and West) and six East European countries having had slower population growth (Czech Republic; Croatia; Estonia;  Hungary; Latvia  and Bulgaria).  All the other major industrialised nations have had faster rates of population growth. Growth was particularly rapid in the US (+42%) as noted above, but also in Australia (+54%); Canada (+45%); Spain (+25%); Japan (+21%); and France (+18%). The Indian population roughly doubled over the same period (96%), while the Chinese population grew by 52%. It is clear that UK population growth has been extremely low by international standards   it is even below that of Italy (+7.6%). Long-run trends, however, mask some significant short-run changes in population growth (Chart 2 & Table 2a). The UK population grew by 2.8 million (4.9%) between 1971 and 1999, but the population has subsequently risen by a further 1.8  million (3.2%).  The  main cause of this increase has been a rise in net inward migration, driven by an increase in the inflow rate to the UK; the outflow rate has remained little changed over the years, although there has been a pickup since 1998. The ratio of births to deaths has seen less variation. In 2004-5 net migration accounted for two-thirds of the change in population (248/375). To place these numbers in some degree of context, net (legal) migration in the United States accounted for approximately one third of net population growth in 2004- 2005.3 Table 2b makes it clear that the scale of net inward migration to the UK has been much lower than in most other EU countries until recently, and even now remains below the levels of both Italy and Spain. In summary, UK population growth appears to have been extremely low by international standards over the past three decades. As such, it would seem likely that the UK could absorb a relatively small inflow of immigrants, by international standards. As we note below, it appears that it has already done so to a considerable degree; the entry of recent A8 migrants appears to have improved the workings of the labour market, reduced wage and inflationary pressures and lowered the natural rate of unemployment. ###newline###  The increase in net migration coincides with changes in UK immigration policy and the relative attractiveness of the UK s economic position over the past  decade.  Most  recently, the increase in the inflow rate of migrants appears in large part to be attributable to immigration policy that accompanied the accession of the A8 countries on May 1st 2004;4 citizens from the A8 nations obtained free movement and the right to work in the UK, Ireland and Sweden from this date.5   But there has continued to be a steady growth   in the inflow of migrants to the UK from non-A8 countries too, especially from the New Commonwealth. The literature on immigration focuses on the economic factors that determine migration. Very simply, the literature says that individuals will compare the income benefits from migration with the economic and social costs of moving. If the benefits outweigh the  costs, they may choose to migrate. The gain from moving will be calculated as the expected income differential between the destination country and the country of origin, which will in turn be determined by the relative probability of getting a job   captured by differences in the unemployment or employment rates. Naskoteen and Zimmer (1980) find for the US that a 10 percentage point increase in the wage differential between the countries of destination and origin increases the probability of migration by 7 percentage points. Borjas (2005) finds that a 10 percentage point increase in the rate of employment growth in the state of origin reduces the probability of migration by approximately 2 percent. There is also evidence that migration is most common among younger and more educated workers (Borjas 2005). Moreover, workers who have just migrated are extremely likely to move back to their original locations. The probability of a migrant returning to the state of origin within a year is about 13 per cent and the probability of moving to another location is 15 per cent (Devanzo, 1983 and Dustmann, 2003). Zaiceva (2006) summarises the empirical literature on the potential migration flows, which he shows to be consistent with between 2 and 4 per cent of the residents of Central and East European countries (CEECS) moving West, in the long run, which constitutes around 1 per cent of the EU15 population. Zaiceva also presents evidence from simulations suggesting that the majority of migrants are predicted to come from Romania, Poland and Bulgaria, which is consistent with other estimates from the literature. Gilpin et al (2006) examine whether A8 citizens have come to the UK because it offers a higher standard of living (GDP per capita) or a higher probability of getting a job (measured by the inverse of the unemployment rate), or both.  They consider data from   the Worker Registration Scheme (see Appendix A for more details on this data source). They compute the number of WRS registrations as a percentage of the home country population and show it is correlated with GDP and unemployment. We update their analysis in Table A. It is apparent that a larger fraction of people of Lithuania (1.60%); Latvia (1.25%); Slovakia (0.92%) and Poland (0.79%) have come to the UK compared to Estonia (0.42%), the Czech Republic (0.24), Hungary (0.14) and Slovenia (0.02) (Table A).  Gilpin et al. find that countries with the lowest GDP per head, such as Lithuania  (2500 Euros) are more likely to be registered on the UK WRS than those from countries with higher GDP, such as Slovenia (11,400 Euros).6 Workers in the WRS data are also more likely to come from countries with the highest unemployment rates, such as Poland (19.0%). Pedersen et al (2004) found similar effects for GDP per capita and the unemployment rate in both source and destination countries in their study of migration flows into OECD countries in the 1990s. ###newline###  The correlation coefficient is clearly highest with 2005 GDP per head, as noted by Gilpin et al., and even higher when GDP is in logs (r=0.837). The correlation is slightly weaker with the unemployment rate, but especially low with  the  employment  rate.7  Interestingly, Schiopu and Siegfried (2006) found that the difference in GDP between the host and home countries increases the size of remittances. Data are also available on the country s rank on the 2005 Human Development Index taken from the Human Development Report of the UN, and their average life satisfaction score for 2002 taken from the Eurobarometer Surveys.8 A lower rank on HDI is better, a higher life satisfaction score is better. The propensity to migrate is even more highly correlated with these two measures than it is with GDP per capita (Table B).9 ###newline###  We explored the correlations with each of the components of the HDI, which includes the life expectancy rate (r=-0.526); the combined gross enrolment ratio for  primary,  secondary and tertiary schools (r=-0.005); and GDP per capita (PPP US$)  for  2004, which has an even better correlation (r=-0.823) than the GDP data used by Gilpin et al,  and in logs the correlation is -0.836. It is already well-known that East Europeans are  more likely to report that they are unhappy (Blanchflower, 2000 and Blanchflower and Freeman 1999). In a recent Candidate Eurobarometer collected between September and October, 2002 (ICPSR #4062) respondents were asked the following question. The means of the life satisfaction score variable correlate reasonably well with the propensity to migrate (r=-0.751) and considerably better than the unemployment or employment rates. In summary, the favourable macroeconomic climate (low unemployment) and high standard of living in the UK (GDP per capita) are reasons why immigrants from the A8 countries may have been attracted to the UK, and why immigrants from Bulgaria and Romania may be attracted in the future. The OECD has recently (2006b) projected that GDP will grow particularly quickly in both Poland and Slovakia over the next couple of years. The OECD projects a growth rate of around 8% in both 2006  and  2007  in Slovakia, and 5% in Poland, where, it suggests remittances from migrants will sustain consumption. The other member of the OECD is Hungary, which is projected to grow at 4% in 2006, but only at 2% in 2007. Rapid GDP growth in some A8 countries and improvements in their unemployment rates might suggest a reduction in the flows of both permanent migrants and especially temporary workers to the UK from the A8 countries in the near future. Pedersen et al (2004) studied migration flows into 27 OECD countries from 1990-2000 and found that network effects, measured as the coefficient of the stock  of immigrants of own national background already resident in a country, had a large positive impact on immigration flows. This suggests that rather than dissipate, the flows may well continue well into the future although the scale of the flow remains uncertain. Further the Bank s regional Agents have undertaken a survey of business contacts concerning their use of migrant labour that suggested that a majority of firms were expecting to make greater use of such labour into the future. ###newline###  It is difficult to get an exact estimate of the size of the flows of individuals from the A8 countries to the UK since accession. Some estimates suggest that around 500,000 A8 workers have come to the UK, but other sources suggest many fewer. It is also unclear what proportion of such workers are long-term migrants and what proportion are here for  a short time and have subsequently returned home, perhaps to return again in the future. The scale and nature of this flow is an important question for policy makers because it affects the labour market and the wider economy. It is therefore important to try and understand and reconcile the differences between different data sources as far as possible. Doing this, we find that 500,000 workers is an upper bound for the stock of  post- accession A8 workers in the UK in late 2006. There are four main sources of data on the flow of A8 individuals. Further details of the sources are provided in Appendix A. We examine estimates of the numbers using each data series in turn. Table 3 reports the number of workers, by A8 country, who registered,  and  were approved for work, on the WRS   a registration scheme for employees from the A8 countries. The self-employed do not need to register  under  the  WRS.  The  largest number in every year has come from Poland. Between 2004Q2  and  2006Q3  over 300,000 Poles had registered, which constitutes 63% of the total. The next largest group (11%) is from Lithuania, which had only 3.4 million residents in 2004, compared with million in Poland.10 The flows by quarter are very similar. The WRS suggests that 486,660 workers had registered to work in the UK since accession   a further 3,895 were refused, 1,035 were exempt and 14,950 applications were withdrawn  making  a grand  total of 510,340  applicants.  The three main  countries from which migrants have come  are Poland (63%); Lithuania (11%); and Slovakia (10%). Ireland has been the other major recipient of migrant flows from the A8. According to Ireland s National Training and Employment Authority (F S), over the first twelve months to April 2005, 83,000 Personal Public Service Numbers (PPSN) were issued to EU10 nationals, which is equivalent to almost 4% of Ireland s labour force. Some  of  these people were, however, already in Ireland prior to May 2004. Another 66,000 PPSNs were issued in the six months from May to October 2005, an increase of 46% on the same period for the previous year.  The OECD (2006a) suggests that the country composition   of A8 workers to Ireland is similar to that of the UK - Poland (54%), Lithuania (19%), Latvia (9%), and Slovakia (8%).11 Some concerns have been expressed about the accuracy of the data from this source as it covers only the principal air and sea routes, and the Channel Tunnel.  There is evidence   of an increase in the number of passenger journeys terminating at airports not routinely covered by the IPS   ie to terminals outside of Gatwick, Heathrow and Manchester   particularly to and from Poland (having increased from 516,000 in 2003 to 1,845,000 in 2005)   so some migrants may have been missed.13,14 Furthermore, many of these extra journeys appear to have resulted from an increase in short-term visits to the UK   those    of less than three months. Table C shows that there has been a steady increase in the ###newline###  Table 5 shows that there has been a sharp rise in the number of A8 individuals that have requested National Insurance numbers   up from 12,000 in 2002/03 to 270,000 in 2005/06.17 Between April 2004 and March 2006,  approximately  380,000  individuals from the A8 countries had registered for a National Insurance number. This estimate is more similar to the WRS than the IPS, and the difference appears to reflect the different time period covered and the inclusion of self-employed workers in the NINo data. It is feasible to obtain estimates of the number of A8 migrants resident in the UK using population weighted LFS micro-data. To the extent that these population weights undercount the number of migrants then this would be a source of bias. Results are reported in Table D. ###newline###  Here we define an A8 migrant based on country of birth; it is possible to use country of origin, but the results are the same. Column 1 replicates the numbers in Gilpin et al (2006) for the years 2003-2005 and updates them to 2006 based on Summer quarters in each year (June, July and August). Data for 2006Q3 (July, August, and September) are also presented. Around 350,000 nationals from the A8 countries were resident in the UK by the Summer of 2006, according to the LFS data, of whom 240,000 had arrived since 2004; nearly 85% were workers (220,000). Over time the proportion of A8 migrants who are workers has risen from 36% to 74%. Somewhat surprisingly, there has been little change in the number who claim to be self-employed since 2004. The LFS data also suggest that 20% of all migrants that arrived in the UK between 2004 and 2006Q3 were Polish, and roughly a third were from the A8 as a whole. The number of A8 migrants entering the UK since Accession appears quite uncertain  given the available data. But the different sources vary in their coverage, both in terms of the migrants captured (including definitional differences) and the period of observation. Table E attempts to accommodate the latter issue, adjusting the NINo and TIM (IPS) numbers such that they   like the LFS and WRS data   also cover the period since Accession. Following adjustment, the number of NINo applications and number of WRS applicants are comparable at around 500,000. The LFS and TIM (IPS) data are much  lower than these, but again comparable with one another. The remaining differences between the estimates reflect the groups of individuals covered and definitions employed. The LFS and TIM data are designed to capture only those migrants who stay in the  country for an extended period of time   more than 6 months for the LFS and 12 months for the IPS. In contrast, the NINo and WRS capture all migrants, including those that might return home relatively quickly   or in some sense commute to the UK for work. The broader ordering of the estimates also makes sense. The LFS micro-data suggest that 30,000 self-employed workers have come to the UK since Accession. This equates to the gap between the adjusted number of NINo applications, which covers all workers, and    the number of WRS applicants, which are solely employees. In addition, we should also expect the estimated number of A8 migrants from the LFS data to exceed the estimate from the TIM(IPS), because the TIM(IPS) employs a more restrictive definition of a migrant   a migrant is someone who changes his or her country of usual residence for a period of at least a year. Having reconciled the differences as far as possible, it appears that 500,000 workers is likely to be an upper estimate of the number of A8 migrants that could potentially be in  the UK in late 2006. The data also suggest that as many as half of the migrants that have come to the UK have not stayed permanently. ###newline###  It does seem that the extent of mis-measurement of the number of foreign workers from the A8 is unlikely to have had any significant impact on the current measurement of the ILO unemployment rate, or the claimant count, as the numbers of additional migrants required to lower the unemployment rate by even 0.1% would involve impossibly large numbers.18 There is another source of data on international migration that supports our findings. Population data recently available from Eurostat (2006) suggest that there was no substantial decline in the populations of any of the A8 countries, especially Poland, between 2004 and 2005. As a proportion  of the  population, the greatest net outflows  have been from Lithuania (-0.60%) and Latvia (-0.55%).  This is consistent with the   flows to the UK from the A8 being largely temporary in nature. The small emigration numbers for the earliest period following accession are also consistent with that view, presented in Table F. ###newline###  Table 6 shows the number of worker applications from the WRS that were approved by region, with the largest numbers in the East of England followed by London. Also  included in the final column of the table is the regional distribution of the unemployment increase of 263,000 that occurred over the twelve months to September 2006. The correlation between the distribution of migrants and growth in  unemployment  is  relatively weak. Table 7 shows the distribution of all migrants by region using data on National Insurance numbers. The table presents numbers registering in 2002-03 and 2005-06 as well as the overall distribution of the migrants themselves alongside the distribution of the 16+ population.  The next to last column reports the number of migrants registering in 2005-  06 as a proportion of the 16+ population in 2006Q2. As was the case with the WRS, the distribution of migrants is only weakly related to the change in unemployment observed over the last year and reported in the final column of the table. It is apparent that registrations of new migrants have increased in all regions, although the numbers are especially high in London and the South East. London and the South East account for approximately 48% of registrations for National Insurance numbers, but only 26% of the 16+ population.  Table 8a uses regression estimation techniques and the LFS micro-data   to confirm the importance of migrants in London and the South East. It appears that the effects of A8 immigration would likely be felt most in the South East and least in the rest of the country. The question down the road  is whether future waves  of immigrants will move outside London, to areas, such as Scotland, which have lower unemployment and a declining and aging population.19 Table 9 reports the distribution of A8 migrants by the top twenty occupations over time from the WRS. The largest occupation is Process operative (Other Factory Worker). As noted by Saleheen and Shadforth (2006), the dominant occupations are less skilled. Interestingly, though, there has been a significant increase in the proportion of  A8  workers in the WRS classified as being in Administration, Business and Management.   The majority of workers in the Administration, Business &  Management  occupation group work for recruitment agencies and could be employed in a variety of occupations, and on a temporary basis.  In  2004 (May-December), 24.8% of registered  workers were  in this category, compared with 36.3% in 2005 and 34.8% in the first three quarters of 2006. Consistent with this finding, Table 8b suggests that approximately one in five new A8 immigrants are in temporary jobs. From Table 8b it is apparent that the A8 migrants are more likely to be migrants in Manufacturing, Distribution, Hotels and Restaurants and Construction than non-A8 migrants or natives. Non-A8 migrants are more likely to be in the public sector   especially as nurses and carers - confirmed by work permits data (Table 10). The proportion of workers who register on the WRS who are young is particularly high and has changed little over time. Of those who applied between May  2004  and  September 2006, 82% were aged 18-34 and 43% were aged 18-24.  The  male:  female ratio was 58:42. Confirming the evidence in the WRS that A8 migrants are disproportionately young and male, 36.3% of applicants for NINos were aged 18-24 in 2005/6, and 44.9% were aged 25-34. The male: female ratio was 54:46. Saleheen and Shadforth (2006) found from the 2005 LFS that recent A8 immigrants are also younger, more likely to be male and single than other recent immigrants or than the indigenous population. Drinkwater et al (2006) found similar results. This is confirmed in the more recent data used here which pools 2004-2006Q3 to ensure larger sample sizes. A8 immigrants were on average 28 years of age compared with 30 years for recent non-A8 immigrants (Table 8a). They were also disproportionately male (59.1% for  A8s  and 48.4% non-A8s) and single (54.2% for A8s and 51.4% for non-A8s). Respondents in the survey were also asked  how willing would you be to live in another European country where the language is different from your mother tongue?  Possible answers were  not at all; not much; to some extent; very much . Column 2 reports the results of estimating an ordered logit where the dependent variable is set to one if not at  all, 2=not much etc. with the same controls as in column 1. The patterns revealed in column 2 are very similar to those in column 1   the probability of being willing to move is higher among the young; men; the unmarried and divorced; the most educated; professionals and business proprietors; those from Latvia and Poland, but also now Slovakia. These equations seem highly consistent with the characteristics of the migrants outlined above   intentions appear to be highly correlated with subsequent actions. Interestingly, the World Bank (2007) addressed the issue of the mobility of the young in  its recent World Development Report. They found that the propensity to  migrate  increases over the teenage years peaking in the early twenties in many destination countries, such as Spain and the United States. Hence, young people make up a higher proportion of the flow of international migrants than the stock. Young people are likely to face lower costs of moving and have higher lifetime returns. The World Bank notes that when the only legal options for the young are through  high-skilled  immigration, categories requiring tertiary education or substantial job experience, migrants are less likely to be young. They also conducted a survey of youths aged 15-24 in seven developing countries (Albania, Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Iraq, Malaysia, Romania and Tajikistan) and asked  if it were possible for you legally to move to another country to work would you?  Data are presented in Table G.22 ###newline###  Very high proportions said they would like to move, especially in Romania and Albania, but the vast majority of those who wanted to move expressed a desire to migrate for only   a short period allowing them to save money to buy a house, open a business, or achieve other goals in their home countries (World Bank (2007) chapter 8 figure 8.5).23 There is other evidence suggesting that there is often significant return migration. For example, LaLonde and Topel (1997) found that 4.8 million of the 15.7 million US immigrants who arrived between 1907 and 1957 had departed by the  latter  year.  Chiswick and Hatton (2003) pointed out that return migration exceeded immigration to   the United States during the 1930s. Yang (2006) recently examined the economics of return migration for temporary labour migration by Filipinos. Yang found that, on  average, a 10% improvement in the exchange rate reduced the 12-month migrant return rate by 1.4 percentage points. This is a large effect, amounting to nearly one-fifth of the mean 12-month return rate in his sample. "(I)t is unlikely that large numbers of A8 citizens will uproot themselves from their homes, come to the UK to work for at least a year in order to secure a future life of state-funded living.  First, there is the effort involved  in this, and we are presumably talking about people who are not prepared to make much effort on most fronts. Second, there is the standard of living involved. Would life on state benefits in the UK really be that much better than life on a low income in Estonia?  Well,  it might be.  But probably not  by enough to make it a worthwhile option for an otherwise idle person if  they had to work for at least a year   perhaps working on a farm on  minimum wages   to get it" (2006, p.13). As we show below, the influx of workers from the A8 appears to have had little or no discernible effect on the unemployment rate or any other labour market aggregate for that matter. It is plausible of course, that  an  influx of immigrants could displace natives or  less recent immigrants, and this is an issue we discuss further below. The large literature on the issue suggests that this is unlikely to have been very important. That being said, LFS data in Table 8b suggests that the unemployment rates for recent A8 immigrants are higher than for natives. For example, the native unemployment rate for men is 5.1%, compared with 6.8% for recent A8 migrants and is even higher for recent non-A8 migrants. The story is similar for females. As we will show below, the higher unemployment rates for A8 migrants arise in large part because of differences in age, which need to be controlled for. Table 13 reports the results of estimating five log hourly wage equations using data from the 2004-2006 LFS. They follow the same structure as in Blanchflower and Oswald (1994a, 1994b). Each equation includes a set of year dummies; race controls are added in column 2; schooling dummies in column 3; region of work, workforce size and industry dummies in column 4. Column 5 then adds controls for recent A8 and  non-A8  immigrants. Adding controls has an impact   some of the difference in wages across groups depends on characteristics particularly schooling, region  and  industry.  Immigrants earn 5% higher wages than non-immigrants without controls and 3% with them. A8 immigrants earn approximately 14% less (column 4) than non-immigrants. Recent A8 immigrants earn 18% less than non-immigrants; 20% less than non-A8 immigrants, whether recent or not. Recent A8 immigrants are relatively low paid.25 It is appropriate to examine the incidence of (self-reported) self-employment among A8 migrants given that the self-employed do not have to register under the WRS, although they do have to apply for a NINo, unless they work illegally in the black economy and    are paid cash in hand. Table 14 once again uses the LFS data file for 2004-2006Q3 to estimate a dprobit, but here the sample is restricted to workers, with the  dependent variable set to one if self-employed and zero if a worker. The results are standard, in that the probability of being self-employed is higher for men, Asians and Chinese, rises with age and is especially high for those with a trade.26 It is low for blacks and those under eighteen and for those with an HND, teaching or nursing qualification only. Immigrants have a higher probability of being self-employed; A8 immigrants who arrived pre-2004 have a particularly high probability (column 1), but recent immigrants have lower probabilities. As we move to the right controls are added. Column 5 adds 21 region of work dummies and 60 industry dummies that result in recent non-A8 immigrants having lower self-employment rates than natives (1.7 percentage points lower), while pre-2004  A8 migrants have much higher probabilities (12.0 percentage points higher). Recent A8 migrants have significantly higher self-employment rates than natives (5.5 percentage points higher than non-immigrants), holding constant characteristics.   being an employee or being self-employed? 29 Column 3  tabulates the proportion  saying they would like to be self-employed. It is apparent from the Table that there is a desire for self-employment in the A8 countries as well as a perceived lack of financial support alongside complex administrative procedures that make it hard to set up in business. It is well known in the literature that capital constraints have a major impact on the ability to become and remain self-employed (Blanchflower and Oswald (1998; Blanchflower, 2000, 2004). These factors will likely contribute to a desire to come to the UK, where these circumstances may appear less prevalent. In summary, holding constant a variety of characteristics including age, qualifications and location, recent A8 immigrants have higher self-employment rates and lower wages than natives, but similar unemployment rates. In contrast, recent non-A8 migrants have a  higher probability of being unemployed, comparable wages and lower self-employment rates than natives. A8 migrants who arrived before 2004 have very low unemployment rates and high self-employment rates, but lower wage rates than natives. ###newline###  A big issue we need to confront is the extent to which the new wave of immigrants has impacted the UK labour market. The literature, from across many countries suggests that impacts of immigration on non-immigrant employment and unemployment outcomes are minimal, but there is some evidence of wage effects. Most of the studies relate to a one-off permanent movement of workers from one country to another, rather than movements back and forth between countries as appears to be happening in the UK. This is similar to (illegal) worker flows between Mexico and the United States as well as legal flows between countries, such as India  and  a number of Gulf states (eg the UAE, Qatar and Kuwait). More recently, Borjas (2003, 2006) and Borjas and Katz (2005) have argued that the negative impacts are large. They used national data from five censuses to show that US workers lost on average about 3% of the real value of their wages because of immigration over the period 1980-2000, and that this loss reached 9% for high school dropouts. Ottaviano and Peri (2005, 2006), however, using a general  equilibrium approach, find  that overall immigration from 1990-2004 has generated a large positive impact on the average wages of the US born, primarily because they find that US and foreign born workers belong to different skill groups.  The least  educated also suffer smaller losses  than previously calculated. Dustman et al (2005) examined the way immigration impacted native outcomes in the    UK using data from the 1983-2000 Labour Force Surveys. They used pooled data for eighteen years across seventeen regions (n=306) but, because of data availability, for the period 1992-2000 for wages. Empirically they estimated a series of regressions with the immigrant-native ratio as a control. Their main findings were that there was  little  evidence of any adverse outcomes for natives on wages, employment or unemployment, consistent with the findings for the US and elsewhere. If there was evidence of any  adverse outcomes it was limited to those with intermediate levels of education.  An increase in immigration, amounting to one per cent of the native population in their preferred IV specification, would lead to a decrease of 0.07 percentage points  in  the native employment rate, but this was not significant at conventional levels. IV  is  necessary because immigrant shares and immigrant outcomes may be spatially correlated because of common fixed influences. Furthermore, the authors found no evidence of any significant effects on wages, unemployment or participation using their IV specification. Hatton and Tani (2005) also find modest wage and employment effects in the UK, but   also find evidence of negative correlations between immigration from abroad to a region and in-migration from other regions. These are only significant  in  southern  regions where immigration of foreign citizens is concentrated. The authors suggest that this is an important mechanism through which the British labour market adjusts. Frijters et al.  (2005) find that immigrant job search is less successful than that of natives; immigrants  are as likely to gain employment through informal methods as via verifiable routes; the probability of success increases with years since migration. The finding that immigrants  do not effectively compete for jobs may thus help explain why immigration has little impact on native employment. Manacorda et al (2006) find evidence that natives and immigrants in the UK  are  imperfect substitutes, like Ottaviano and Peri (2005, 2006) for the US. They find that a 10% rise in the share of immigrants increases native-migrant male wage differentials by 2%. This acts to attenuate any effect of increased labor supply on the native wage distribution and then only has a sizeable effect on wages of migrants who were already in the UK.  It also helps explain the findings of Dustman et al (2005) and others that the  wage impact of immigration on natives is small. Gilpin et al (2006) recently conducted a careful econometric analysis of the impact of the new A8 migrants. In particular they focussed on their impact on the claimant  count, as  this is not a sample. They found that: There have been a number of papers that have examined major flows of immigrants into a country using natural experiments. The opening of the UK to A8 immigrants is directly comparable to these exogenous supply shocks to the various labour markets. These  include the Mariel boatlift into the US from Cuba in 1980 as well as from Algeria to France in 1962 after independence; Jews to Israel from the Soviet Union between 1990  and 1994; to Portugal from Mozambique and Angola in the mid 1970s; to several European countries as a result of the Balkan Wars in the late 1980s and early 1990s; into Austria especially from the former Yugoslavia, and finally to Germany between 1985 and 1989, particularly from Turkey. The evidence from these  studies  is  remarkably  consistent   these immigrant flows have had little or no significant/substantive impact on any native outcomes. There is a reason to believe that the scale of any impact from these experiments would be greater than that from the A8 in the UK, as in most cases the scale of the influx was greater, and in many cases, there was no potential return of the migrants to their country of origin as is occurring in the UK. Hunt (1992) examined the impact of the arrival of 900,000 people of European origin returning to France within one year following the independence of  Algeria  in  1962, which increased France s labour force by 2%. Hunt found that, despite the fact that the repatriates had high unemployment rates themselves, there was no evidence that this flow of migrants had any sizable impact on unemployment of non-repatriates. A  one  percentage point higher proportion of repatriates implied an increase in non-repatriate unemployment of at most 0.2 percentage points. There was also weak evidence on the impact on wages   a one percentage point higher proportion of repatriates was associated with 0.8% lower wages. The labour-force participation of non-repatriates was unaffected by the presence of the repatriates. Winter-Ebmer and Zweim ller (1996, 1999) examined the impact of a dramatic rise in   the share of alien workers in Austria as a result of the breakdown of  the  former communist regimes, especially from former Yugoslavia. Between 1988 and 1991 the foreign share of employment in Austria increased from 5.4% to 9.0%. Winter-Ebmer and Zweim ller (1999) find only a modest impact of immigration on the unemployment risk for native workers under the age of 35. Winter-Ebmer and Zweim ller (1996) found negligible or even positive wage effects. Angrist and Kugler (2003) use the Balkan Wars as a Mariel-boatlift style immigration experiment to examine the impact of immigration in the European Economic Area for 1983-1999. There was very little change in immigration flow until 1988, but the late  1980s and early 1990s saw a marked upturn. The increases were greatest for Germany, beginning in 1989 and later in Finland, France and Sweden. The flow from Yugoslavia was particularly important after 1990.  Angrist and Kugler (2003) found that an increase   in the foreign share of 10% would reduce native employment rates by 0.2-0.7 percentage points. There was also some evidence that the impact of the foreign share on the employment of native men was greatest in countries with less flexible labour markets, higher replacement rates and higher entry costs. The estimates typically  imply  more native job losses in countries with less flexible labour and product markets. The empirical evidence from around the world suggests that, even when there have been very large flows of migrants, which are greater in magnitude than the one s the UK has experienced from the A8, that there have been few, if any, measured impacts on native outcomes. ###newline###  The Monetary Policy Committee is interested in immigration to the extent that it affects inflation and growth in the medium term. The purpose of this section is to bring together the findings reported earlier in this paper to make a judgement about the prospects for growth and inflation in the near term, as we see them at present. The overall impact of immigration, including immigration from the A8 countries, on inflation and growth is on its own not clear-cut   there is no automatic rule-of-thumb that we can look to in order to determine the impact on the economy. This is because immigrants are both consumers and workers/producers, and so immigration affects both aggregate demand and aggregate supply. And it is the balance between demand  and supply (sometimes called the output gap) that determines inflation. So the MPC needs to take a judgement about whether immigration has added more to supply or to demand in recent years. We look at each of these in turn. In thinking about the supply potential of the economy, most people would probably agree that extra (immigrant) workers in the economy would raise the supply potential of the economy. But the extent to which aggregate supply increases will depend on  the  economic characteristics of immigrants relative to native workers. A recent survey of contacts of the Bank of England s regional Agents suggested that the new A8 migrants were highly productive.  This is consistent with the findings of a Home Office Study on  the use of migrant labour that concluded as follows. In thinking about aggregate demand, most people would agree that immigrants are extra consumers and that they raise aggregate consumption demand. It is  likely  that  immigrants spend a lower fraction of their income when compared to domestic workers, perhaps because they send remittances back home or spend less on durable goods while temporarily resident in the UK   this would, on its own, suggest that immigrants raise demand by less than they raise supply.31 However, the funds that migrants send home might be recycled back to the UK through greater export demand, and UK consumers might also benefit from lower prices as a result of the extra productivity of migrants. Aggregate demand might also rise because of increased investment. The theoretical argument here is that firms require both labour and capital to produce their output. Immigration gives them more labour, and firms may wish to supplement this with more capital. But the extent to which investment rises, and how quickly, will depend on the skills of immigrants and the technologies of firms. If firms are able to substitute between labour and capital, then there may be a smaller impact on investment than  might  otherwise be the case. Early work by Welch (1969), Griliches (1970) and Berndt and Christensen (1974) all suggested that physical capital is more complementary with skilled than with unskilled labour. More recently, Lewis (2006) found that US cities with a larger share of migrant labour are also the ones with less capital intensive production technologies. On balance we would suggest that at present it appears that recent A8 immigration has acted to reduce the natural rate of unemployment in the UK and raised the supply  potential of the economy. But it also seems  that recent immigration is likely to have  raised potential supply by more than it has raised demand, and  thereby has acted to  reduce inflationary pressures. This argument holds for three reasons. First, the consumption behaviour of native workers may have been affected by the increased  fear  of unemployment resulting from a more flexible labour market. Second, the recycling of remitted funds back to the UK is unlikely to be perfect. Third, firms may  able  to substitute between capital and labour, offsetting some of the potential for investment spending to rise. ###newline###  While we currently believe that immigration on its own is likely to have reduced the natural rate of unemployment and inflationary pressures in the past few years, there are off-setting forces that may have pushed the natural rate back up more recently. In particular, developments in the labour market over the past year, such as the up-rating of the national minimum wage (NMW) and the rising participation of older workers could have, ceteris paribus, raised the natural rate, with corresponding implications for inflation and growth prospects going forward. A key question surrounding these prospects is how to interpret the recent rise in the actual unemployment rate. If it has occurred without a rise in the natural rate of unemployment then one might conclude that there is more slack in the labour market relative to the past, and continued immigration is likely to keep inflationary pressures down in the future.   But, if the natural rate has risen then there is more uncertainty about whether spare capacity has risen over the past year. Why might the natural rate of unemployment have risen? In the section on the characteristics of immigrants we found that immigrants are more likely to be young, and that the pay of new immigrants (including those from the A8 countries) is lower than that of previous immigrants and UK-born workers. Given this, a rise in labour supply via immigration will mean that there will be a larger fraction of young workers in the  economy who have a higher probability of unemployment. This change to the  demographic mix of the population may raise the natural rate.32 Similarly the increased participation of older workers may also have raised the natural rate of unemployment if they have displaced younger workers. Or, if the level of the NMW is set at rate that is higher than the level at which local labour markets would otherwise clear, this will tend   to lower the demand  for labour and raise the natural rate of unemployment.  The rise in  the NMW, coupled with the fact immigrant workers tend to earn less   and so are likely   to benefit from the rise in the NMW   could also lead to a rise in the natural rate of unemployment. These changes could more than cancel out any declines from A8 immigration outlined above. The challenge for policy makers is that it is very difficult to obtain an accurate estimate    of the natural rate of unemployment, particularly in real time. But policy makers need to take a judgment about the degree of spare capacity in the economy, and that requires   some judgment about the natural rate of unemployment. For that reason we investigate whether the recent rise in unemployment is related to the three structural changes outlined above: the rise in immigration; the participation of older  workers;  and, the up-rating of the NMW. If it is, then one might argue that the rise in the unemployment rate has been accompanied by a rise in the natural rate of unemployment. This analysis exploits the regional variation in each of these factors, but is unable to provide conclusive evidence of any change. First, has the recent rise in unemployment been highest in regions which have seen the largest increase in immigration?  Chart 3 shows new immigrants   those arriving since   the start of 2004   are more likely to settle, at least initially, in London than elsewhere. Chart 4 shows the change in the share of new immigrants going to each region. The fact that London is negative means that a smaller share of immigrants settled in London in 2006, compared to 2005. The regions that have seen a falling share of migrants are London, the East, North East, North West, Yorkshire & Humber and Wales: three (Y&H, NE & London) out of these six regions have also seen some of the largest increases in  their unemployment rates (Chart 5). But, Chart 6 shows the opposite of what we might have expected; regions with the biggest increases in immigration have tended to see the smallest rises in their unemployment rates.33, 34 Of course, this is consistent with the possibility that foreign workers are attracted to those regions where the unemployment  rate is lowest and opportunities are greatest, for which there appears to be some evidence (Chart 7). However, we know that most immigrants are young (43% of workers on the WRS are  aged 18-24), and that the most recent rise in the aggregate unemployment rate has been driven by an increase in youth unemployment. In fact, the proportion of total unemployment accounted for by 18-24 year olds has been rising steadily, from 24.3% of the total in 2000, to 30.7% in 2006Q3.35 So what about the possibility that the influx of migrants has increased the youth unemployment rate? Chart 8 shows regions with the largest increases in total unemployment were not necessarily regions with the largest increases in youth unemployment. Chart 9 shows that there is only a weakly positive (but statistically insignificant) relationship between those regions that have witnessed the largest increases in youth unemployment and those that have seen the biggest influxes of new immigrants. So it seems that the increase in the unemployment rate of 18-24 year olds has had relatively little to do with the influx of migrants. What about the possibility that the increased participation of older workers has displaced younger workers? The horizontal axis in Chart 10 plots the change in the activity rates of workers above state pension age36 between 2005Q3 and 2006Q3 for all regions in the   UK. Activity rates among older workers have increased in all regions, but there appears   to be no correlation between the increased activity rates of older workers and  the  increased unemployment rates of youth workers at a regional level. The outlier  observation on the bottom right of the chart is Wales. Can the rising NMW explain the increase in the unemployment rate? There may be something in this, especially given the most recent increases in the NMW on October 1st 2006: from  5.05 to  5.35 (5.9%) for those aged over 22; from  4.25 to  4.45 (4.7%) for 18-21 year olds; and from  3 to  3.30 (10.0%) for 16-17 year olds.37 The minimum wage is set nationwide in nominal terms and hence its real level varies markedly by region; its real value is much higher outside London and the South East and that is where it is expected to bite (Stewart, 2002), because it will enter at a higher point  on the wage distribution.  The minimum is also most likely to bind for unskilled 22-24  year olds who are paid adult rates and 18 year olds who jump from the 16-17 year olds  rate. Chart 11 shows how two of the NMW rates compare to wages at the bottom end (10th percentile) of the wage distribution in each region using ASHE, and additionally for each age group using the LFS micro-data. According to the data, the newly announced minimum wages are likely to be a binding constraint for employers in all regions except London and the South East for the over 22 s and in all regions for those aged 18-21. Taking the LFS data at face value, it is possible that employers may respond to (or have already responded to) the higher minimum wage rates by cutting back on employment. If that were the case, then one might argue that the natural rate of unemployment may have been pushed up recently. There are estimates from the Department of Trade and Industry of the number of workers in each region who are likely to get a pay rise as a consequence of the recent rises in the NMW.38 We compute a measure of the  share  of workers in each region who will be affected by the NMW by dividing this DTI estimate by the total number of employees in each region. Against this we plot the change in youth unemployment (Chart 12).  The  chart shows that regions hit most by the NMW are also the regions which have seen the biggest rise in the youth unemployment rate, though the relationship is not statistically significant. Most studies39 have failed to find statistically significant evidence that the introduction of the NMW, and past increases to it, have had adverse affects on the demand for labour and employment. While it is too early to test the impact of the most recent increment, it is  clear that if the NMW continues to rise then eventually it will start to have an impact on the amount of labour firms employ and the natural rate of unemployment. ###newline###  Over the past eighteen months the unemployment rate has risen by 0.8 percentage points. To find out whether this rise in unemployment has been related to structural factors we have investigated whether regional changes in the unemployment rate have  been correlated with changes in the share of new immigrants, older worker activity rates or estimates of the number of people that will benefit from rises in the NMW. We have found that there are no significant relationships between any of these variables and the   rise in actual (and youth) unemployment rates across regions. Of course, there may be other macro-economic factors that might have raised the natural rate of unemployment, at least temporarily. Nickell (2006) has noted that the equilibrium rate of unemployment will rise if workers attempt to sustain rates of real wage growth when the rate consistent with stable employment shifts unexpectedly.  If workers persist   in attempting to bargain for rates of real wage growth which take no account of the movement in the terms of trade, this will tend to raise unemployment. Exactly the same argument applies if there is an unexpected fall in trend productivity growth, perhaps brought about by rises in oil prices or an increase in labour taxes. For example, if labour taxes (payroll tax rates plus income tax rates plus consumption tax rates) go up, the real post-tax consumption wage must fall if real labour costs per employee facing firms are   not to rise.  Any  resistance to this fall would lead to a rise in unemployment.  To this  point there is no evidence of significant wage resistance or second round effects from the recent oil shock; wage increases have remained benign, presumably in part because of the dampening effect of the recent A8 migrant flow. Our findings are not conclusive evidence, but they do suggest that the recent rise in the unemployment rate is unrelated to structural factors. In other words, there is no evidence from the labour market that the natural rate of unemployment has risen in the past year. Policymakers may therefore interpret the rise in the actual unemployment rate as a reflection of greater slack in the labour market now compared to a year ago, which is  likely to keep wage and inflationary pressures subdued in the near future. ###newline###  UK population growth over the last thirty-five years has been remarkably low in comparison with other countries; the population grew by just 7% between 1971 and 2004, less than all the other EU15 countries (except Germany), Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand and the United States, plus China and India. The rate of UK population growth  did exceed that of six countries from the former Soviet bloc (Czech Republic; Croatia; Estonia; Hungary; Latvia and Bulgaria), but was below the rates of growth of Poland, Lithuania, Slovakia and Slovenia. The UK population has grown at a faster pace since the turn of the millennium.  This recent growth has been driven primarily  by changes in net migration.  Both the inflow  and outflow migration rates have risen but the inflow rate has risen more rapidly, most recently, with an influx of migrants from eight East European countries. However, the increase in the net migration flow predates the influx of A8 migrants, reflecting a steady rise in the number of immigrants from Asia and the Middle East too. The propensity to migrate to the UK is higher the lower is GDP per capita in each of the A8 countries. The decision is also strongly correlated with life satisfaction scores and unemployment rates, but is uncorrelated with employment rates or rates of inflation. There appears to be consistent evidence from the Worker Registration Scheme and National Insurance Number applications that approximately 500,000 migrants from the A8 countries had come to work in the UK between May 2004 and late 2006. But other sources suggest a significant proportion of these workers   perhaps as many as a half - have returned to their country of origin. The empirical literature from around the world suggests little or no evidence that immigrants have had a major impact on native labour market outcomes such as wages   and unemployment. Recent work by a number of other authors for the UK is also consistent with this view. The impact of recent migration from the A8 countries on the UK economy will be determined by the extent  to which immigrants add to  supply relative to demand, since it  is the balance between these two factors that determines prospects for  inflation.  We  argue that at present it appears that A8 immigration has tended to increase supply  by  more than it has increased demand in the UK (in the short run), and thereby acted to  reduce inflationary pressures. There seems to be broad agreement that immigration is likely to have reduced the natural rate of unemployment in the UK over the past few years. But there is some uncertainty about what has happened to the natural rate in the very recent past and what might    happen to it in the near future.  This is because immigration has not been the only shock   to affect the labour market very recently. This paper examines the relationship between  the rising unemployment rate and other structural developments across regions, but fails   to find any statistically significant relationships. It seems appropriate to conclude that the natural rate of unemployment has probably not risen in the very recent past and that   recent immigration continues to suppress inflationary pressures. ###newline###  Regions are based on the applicant s employer s postcode, where supplied. Regions are defined according to the Post Office s Postal Address Book regions. ###newline###  Migrants from the A8 are obliged to register on the Home Office administered Worker Registration Scheme (WRS) if they are employed in the UK for a month or more. Nationals of the A8 countries who wish to take up employment in the UK for a period of  at least a month are generally required to register with the Home Office to work in the  UK. Workers who are self-employed do not need to register and are therefore not  included in these figures; there may also be other workers from the accession countries who for one reason or another do not register and are thus also not included in these figures. Failure to apply within one month of starting a job means the employment is illegal. There was a  50 charge (now raised to  70) for the first application. Individuals working in the UK before May 2004 without permission must also register. After a  year  of constant legal employment, migrants do not have to register on the WRS, instead they are entitled to a residence permit which gives the holder the right to live and work in the UK. The data from the WRS provided here are data on applicants to the scheme rather than applications. Applicants must register more than once if they are employed by more than one employer. They must also re-register if they  change  employer. Each application to  the WRS therefore represents one job, not one applicant. To avoid counting applicants more than once, each applicant is represented only once in the data, with information relating to the first job for which he/she registered. Workers from these accession  countries are generally required to have work continuously for 12 months before they are entitled to income related benefits.40 International Passenger Survey (IPS) which is a voluntary survey of individuals passing through the main UK air and sea ports and the Channel Tunnel.  The  IPS questions 250,000 passengers annually of whom only 1% are migrants. The survey is based on respondent's intended length of stay and includes questions on age, sex, marital status, citizenship and country of last residence. The benefit of the IPS is that it provides data on those who leave as well as those who enter the country making it possible to measure net flows. National Insurance number allocations to overseas nationals.41 NINos are required for employment/self-employment purposes or to claim benefits and tax credits. The Department of Work and Pensions is responsible for allocating NINos to overseas nationals who apply to their local Jobcentre Plus office. An interview occurs and documentation is examined which may include the use of ultra-violet lighting to ensure passports and visas are genuine. The DWP Central Control Units corroborate  the  evidence supplied a interview eg checking that an  employer is genuine and has made a  job offer to an applicant. Once the NINo is allocated HMRC add the NINo onto the National Insurance recording System (NIRS) which holds details of national insurance contributions and income tax. Over the period 1995 to 2004 total approvals including work permits, first permissions, extensions, changes of employment and supplementary employment increased by 326 per cent, but was followed by a 7 percent fall in 2005 (Salt and Millar, 2006). The largest annual increases were between 2000 and 2001 as a consequence of the IT boom. In terms of the nationalities covered, out of 86,191 work permits and first permissions 33.9% were for Indian nationals followed by 10.7% from the USA. This compares with 24,161 admitted in 1995 of which 8.3% were from India and 32.6% from the USA. The employment of people who are subject to immigration control is regulated by the granting of work permits. Under the 1971 Immigration Act a work permit is issued to a specific employer for a named person for a specific job. A work permit has to be issued  for all foreign nationals who are not EEA citizens and who wish to work in the UK unless they enter on another work-related scheme or have some other status (such as student) where some work is allowed.42 There are five other categories of work permit application a) First Permission   this is similar to the work permit but is granted for foreign workers who are already living in the UK who do not already have a permit to work. b) In country extension   application from an employer who wishes to extend the employment of an individual currently working for them in the UK. c) In country change of employment   application from an  employer  who wishes to employ an individual already in the UK who originally entered with  a  work permit for a different employer or who wishes to engage an individual in other work for the same  employer. d) In  country technical change   applications from employers  who wish to continue to engage an individual in the same job, but where minor details have changed, such as the address the individual is working at, or if the individual or the employer has changed their name. e)  Work permit extension   extension applications  from employers to extend the employment of an individual who is out of the UK at the time the application is considered. A8 nationals were covered by work permits are included in figures prior to may 2004. The Labour Force Survey (LFS) is a continuous household survey, which provides a wide range of data on labour market statistics and related topics such as training, qualifications, income and disability. The LFS has been running since Spring 1992 in its present form, although a LFS has been carried out in Britain since 1973. Between 1973  and 1983, a biennial survey was carried out during the spring. In  1984,  the  survey became annual. In Spring 1992, for the first time, the data were made available quarterly, with a quarterly sample size approximately equivalent to that of the previous annual data, thus becoming the Quarterly Labour Force Survey. Each quarter, interviews are achieved at about 59,000 addresses with about 138,000 respondents. From January 2006 the LFS moved to calendar quarters.