 Paul Fisher, Executive Director Markets and Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England ###newline###  We have just experienced the biggest global financial crisis in history. The United Kingdom   like many of the most advanced economies   is now emerging from the worst recession for at least a generation. The response from the authorities, across the world, has been substantial and wide- ranging. Today, I want to focus on the Bank of England s operations during the crisis and their implications for our balance sheet. The ability of the Bank to influence the economy through its actions in financial markets should be of profound interest to the pensions industry, both in terms of our objective of restoring nominal spending growth so as to hit the inflation target, and in terms of the immediate implications for financial asset prices. We think the best way to understand the Bank s operations is to take our balance sheet as an organising framework. I hope that I can convince you of that today, especially since this audience is better placed than most to understand a balance sheet approach! The Bank s balance sheet enables us to fulfill our core purposes, which are to promote and maintain monetary and financial stability. My focus today will be on what we call the Sterling Monetary Framework or SMF. This is the means by which the Bank implements monetary policy, and offers liquidity insurance to the banking system. I want to make one point clear up front. The SMF has to control the amount of money in the economy consistent with monetary policy objectives. The liquidity insurance operations also provide temporary, short-term liquidity assistance to commercial banks (and building societies   but for the rest of this talk I will just refer to commercial banks for the sake of brevity). That support helps to minimise disruptions to the liquidity and payments services which commercial firms offer to the economy. What our framework cannot do is provide medium-term funding to the banking sector to support their lending activities. It would take too long to explore this argument fully today, but you might like to think of it this way: given that we have to control the amount of money in the system to target inflation, the Bank has to be able to both put liquidity into the system and take it out again, whenever that proves necessary. So the Bank could never create a stable medium-term funding source for commercial bank lending, even if we thought that was our job. Which it is not. This point is not widely appreciated, but is very germane to current policy debates. The rest of this talk may make that easier to understand and I shall come back to it at various points. What I want to do next is to explore the overall scale of central bank actions during the crisis. I am then going to take you through the crisis in chronological fashion, describing the new operations that we introduced, in sequence, and their implications for the balance sheet. I shall finish with some remarks on how we might exit from those operations as the economy recovers. (Clearly, a very detailed chronology would take some time. The first appendix sets out a timeline/aide-memoire of our operations during the past two years or so.) Like central banks in other advanced economies, our operations have evolved very rapidly over the past two years. That has resulted in a considerable expansion of the balance sheet, especially since the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Relative to annual nominal GDP, the balance sheets of the US Federal Reserve (Fed), the Eurosystem (ie the ECB and the national central banks of those states that have adopted the euro) and the Bank of England have all increased by broadly similar amounts, as shown on Chart 1.2 If one included the Bank s Special Liquidity Scheme (SLS)   which, as an asset swap, is off balance sheet   the UK expansion would reach around 25% of annual GDP. Before moving on to the details, it is worth setting recent events in a much longer historical context. The Bank s balance sheet as a proportion of GDP has   even excluding the SLS   been expanded to be about as large as at any point in the past two centuries, a period that included: the aftermath of the Napoleonic wars; two world wars; the Great Depression, and a number of banking failures and financial crises (Chart 2). ###newline###  In normal circumstances, we would implement the desired monetary policy stance by setting interest rates. Our ability to do that derives from the banking system s demand for central bank money: banknotes in circulation and the balances held by commercial banks in their reserves accounts at the Bank of England. We would set the price of this money and then supply the quantity demanded consistent with that price. The size and composition of the central bank balance sheet plays no independent role. Banknotes are one of the two main liabilities of the Bank. They are bought from us at face value, on demand (shown in blue on Chart 3).3 The other main liability on the Bank s balance sheet is the aggregate balance on commercial bank reserve accounts (shown in green on Chart 3). These essentially act like current accounts for commercial banks. Such balances are among the safest assets a bank can hold and they are the ultimate means of payment. They can be used by banks to make payments between each other, or to purchase banknotes or other assets from us. Reserves balances are intrinsic to the Bank s normal implementation of monetary policy. To understand how the Bank s balance sheet has changed during the crisis, it is important to understand how the Bank undertakes this function in normal circumstances. Let me briefly outline the key features of the revised framework introduced in May 2006. The framework had three main elements: reserve accounts, standing facilities and open market operations. They came together to keep overnight and other very short term interest rates broadly in line with Bank Rate between the MPC s decisions. Over the monthly maintenance period, that is between MPC meetings, commercial bank reserves holdings are remunerated at Bank Rate, so long as, over the month, they average within a narrow range around a target. A unique feature of the UK system is that commercial banks choose their own reserves target at the start of each monthly period. Individually, on any given day, commercial banks have a choice between varying their reserves position at the Bank and transacting in the market. In case of operational disruption, or exceptional volatility in overnight interest rates, reserves account holders may also borrow from, or lend to the Bank via our Operational Standing Facilities. They can do this overnight in unlimited amounts, but at a penal rate compared with Bank Rate. Providing banks are able to meet their individual reserves targets, this framework provides incentives for participants to arbitrage and so minimise any difference between market rates and Bank Rate until the next MPC decision date. But for this to work, the Bank needs to ensure that its (net) supply of money to the system is just sufficient in aggregate so that the commercial firms  targets for reserve accounts are validated. The new SMF initially generated reserves balances of around  24 billion in May 2006. These liabilities are shown in green on Chart 3. The Bank s Open Market Operations (or OMOs) are the means through which we provide sufficient money to the system so that banks can collectively meet their targets for reserves accounts. These operations are ordinarily the balancing item on the balance sheet and their size reflects all the day-to-day sterling flows across the Bank s balance sheet. Under the 2006 framework, OMOs were to be undertaken on a weekly basis via an operation in which banks bid, usually to borrow funds from the Bank, at Bank Rate. OMOs take the form of lending money against high-quality collateral (that is a  repo  transaction) for a fixed term. These loans could, in principle, be exclusively done via short-term operations. Our standard one week operations are assets, shown in yellow on Chart 4. I don t have time in this speech to discuss all of the items on the Bank s balance sheet. For those interested in more detail there is an annex which covers items such as the Bank of England s foreign currency reserves, and its customer business. ###newline###  To recap, the objectives of the Bank s operating framework are a function of the two core purposes of the Bank in the spheres of monetary and financial stability. They are to implement monetary policy by maintaining market interest rates in line with Bank Rate at maturities to the next MPC decision date. And to reduce the cost of disruptions to the liquidity and payments services supplied by commercial banks, via the ability to provide short-term liquidity support. This  liquidity insurance  must be balanced against the costs of creating incentives for banks to take greater risks. It will be helpful to make a distinction between these two objectives as I describe the Bank s response to the crisis. For monetary policy implementation, the main changes started in March 2009 when, with interest rates close to zero, large elements of the framework were suspended to allow the direct injection of money into the economy, on a much larger scale, and independent of the demand for banknotes or reserve account balances. For our liquidity insurance operations, the evolution was more continuous, although it is fair to say that the pace of change accelerated when the failure of Lehman Brothers led to a widespread loss of confidence in the financial system in September 2008. There was some expansion of the Bank s balance sheet from August 2007 onwards, principally because, in response to the stresses in bank funding markets, banks voluntarily chose to hold more reserves. That was how our system was designed to work. Our counterparty banks collectively increased their reserves targets from  16 billion in July 2007 to a peak of  45 billion by December 2008. At the start of the maintenance period in September 2007, however, the commercial banks collectively raised their targets by only  1.1 billion. It was clear to us that this was insufficient and that more liquidity would be needed. Using the flexibility built into the system, the Bank expanded its lending operations beyond the amount needed for banks to meet their targets. At one point during that September 2007 maintenance period around an additional  9 billion was injected. In order not to penalise the commercial banks for holding reserve balances in excess of their targets, during September, the Bank also widened the normally narrow target ranges for each bank within which reserves were remunerated, to ensure that the banking system as a whole could hold the additional reserves without financial penalty. The target ranges were widened again in Autumn 2008 when the crisis deepened. During the Autumn of 2007, it was clear that the lack of liquidity in markets was preventing banks from funding themselves through normal means. Initially, we provided additional 3 month operations, offering 4 auctions of  10 billion each, against wider collateral and at a penalty rate. These were not taken up by the banks. By December 2007, bank funding markets had become even more difficult. So, there was a co-ordinated approach by the major central banks who all announced additional measures. In the UK, we offered further expanded 3 month repos. This time without a penalty, against a much wider range of collateral than accepted previously.  This included AAA RMBS and covered bonds. These extended collateral long-term repos (or eLTRs) were offered in auctions initially of  10 billion. When the crisis deepened in the Autumn of 2008, they were offered in greater size and at greater frequency and the eligible collateral was widened further to include securities backed by commercial mortgage assets and corporate debt. At their peak during January 2009 the stock of outstanding ELTRs reached  180 billion (the light blue bars on Chart 4 show this). SLS swaps are structured similarly to stock lending transactions, with banks paying a fee for the bills they borrow. Hence they do not appear on the Bank s balance sheet. The terms of the SLS made it equivalent to three-year funding. How does this sit with the central bank not providing funding? The key point is that the SLS could not be funded by creating central bank money. It was only possible using funding provided from the Government via UK Treasury bills. This reinforces the point that bank funding can only be provided   directly or indirectly   by savings. After the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, financial market conditions deteriorated dramatically further. The Bank introduced a number of additional measures. The drawdown period for the SLS was extended from 21 October to the end of January 2009. The Discount Window Facility was launched in October 2008. The Bank drew on a number of the features of the SLS in designing this new, permanent bilateral liquidity insurance facility. In the Facility, banks and building societies may borrow gilts against a wide range of collateral, at fees reflecting the type of collateral and the size of drawing. It is designed to avoid encouraging imprudent liquidity management in the future. Like the SLS, transactions under the DWF represent asset swaps. They do not appear on the Bank s balance sheet, and they do not normally affect the provision of central bank reserves. In recognition of continuing stresses in financial markets, the Bank announced in January 2009 that, for an additional fee of 25 basis points, it would permit drawing from the DWF with a term of 364 days in addition to the standard option to draw for 30 days. For us, the DWF was perhaps the most significant development in our operational framework in this period. In launching it, the Bank took the decision that it could be transparent about the collateral it is prepared to take in a new, permanent public facility. The terms were designed to be consistent with avoiding creating incentives for commercial banks to take greater risks in future. Of course, they were also designed to protect the Bank from the risk of loss. For assets to be admitted as eligible in the DWF, the Bank needs to be able to value them, and to be able to manage the risks in the event that counterparty default means that we take outright ownership. The fees that apply in the DWF reflect the type of collateral used, with higher fees being applied the more risky the collateral, with  own-name collateral    where the assets were originated by the borrowing bank   being in the category with the highest fee. We are considering widening the collateral eligible for use in the DWF in due course, subject of course to the basic principle that we must be able to value and manage the associated risks. There was one further major response to the pressures created by Lehman Brothers collapse. As some dollar funding markets closed, there was extremely poor liquidity in dollar inter-bank markets, especially during European trading hours before the US market opened. This problem had existed for continental European banks from quite early in the crisis and the ECB had conducted a currency swap with the Fed to provide dollar loans in the European time zone. But the problems became more acute and widespread from September 2008. So the Bank of England joined other central banks in offering to lend US dollars overnight, beginning on 18 September 2008. The Bank established a swap facility with the Federal Reserve to provide the funding for these operations, offering $40 billion initially. By late September, the immediate pressure had eased somewhat, but concerns remained about access to US dollar funding, especially over the quarter end. The Bank introduced a one-week operation alongside its overnight operations. In mid-October, the central banks involved in US dollar operations announced that the existing variable rate auctions were to be replaced with fixed-rate operations of unlimited size.6 The Bank began conducting additional operations at one-month and three-month maturities, with counterparties able to borrow any amount against the Bank s wider pool of eligible collateral. At its peak, the stock of US dollars provided through the Bank s operations reached about $86 billion. (These assets are shown in pink on Chart 4 and the proceeds of the swap with the Fed as a liability on Chart 3)). As pressures receded during 2009, the central banks involved announced the withdrawal of, first the overnight and then the one month dollar operations and, in September, of the three month operations. In common with the New York Fed and other central banks, the Bank continues to keep its US dollar operations under review in the light of market conditions. In the stressed market conditions that prevailed from August 2007 until March of this year, the flexibility inherent in the existing framework was sufficient to implement monetary policy, with one exception   draining excess liquidity. I have noted how extra liquidity was injected via eLTRs in large scale in the Autumn of 2008. That meant that there was more central bank money in the system than was needed to meet the demand for banknotes and reserve accounts.  Short-term lending operations (an asset shown in yellow on Chart 4) were not necessary and were halted. On the required scale, widening the target ranges for accounts would no longer have been sufficient and the excess central bank money would have been inconsistent with the desired setting of interest rates. So our liquidity insurance operations were creating a challenge for monetary policy control. We needed a new instrument to drain money from the system. That new instrument was the one-week Bank of England bill. These were offered to commercial banks via weekly tender, and remunerated at Bank Rate. At their peak, over  100 billion of bills were issued on 8 January 2009 (a liability shown in purple on Chart 3). They also subsequently became an integral part of the regime under the early months of the asset purchase programme, when they were changed to be variable rate. Aside from introducing these bills, the Bank s apparatus for implementing monetary policy was largely unchanged. And the size and composition of the Bank s balance sheet played a role in liquidity insurance, but no independent role in the delivery of the MPC s desired monetary stance. That changed on 5 March 2009   my first week as Director for Financial Markets and my first MPC meeting as a voting member of the Committee   when we announced that, in addition to reducing Bank Rate by 50 basis points to its lowest ever rate of 1/2%, the Bank would undertake a programme of asset purchases financed by the issuance of central bank reserves. As we purchased assets from the financial sector, we allowed sufficient money to remain in the system so that reserves would rise in line with our asset purchase programme. In fact, we were forcing the banks collectively to hold far more reserves than they would have chosen as voluntary targets. Because of that, significant elements of the SMF were suspended. Instead of having voluntary targets and reserves averaging, we made a controlled expansion of reserve balances, and remunerated all reserve accounts at Bank Rate. And we used Bank of England bills to drain any excess created by the simultaneous injection of money by the eLTRs. This programme initially involved a plan to buy  75 billion of private and public sector assets, over a period of three months and was increased at subsequent MPC meetings to currently stand at  200 billion. The purpose of these asset purchases (which have been mainly gilts) is to expand money spending in the economy and hence help the MPC meet the inflation target. The way in which it does that has been described elsewhere, but in essence, boosting the cash holdings of those who sell the assets will trigger a range of further adjustments in the economy.  That should have the effect of raising asset prices, reducing yields on more risky assets, and will subsequently feed through to money spending. All the assets purchased in these programmes, gilts and corporate securities, are held off balance sheet in the Bank of England Asset Purchase Facility Fund (the BEAPFF). This Fund is financed by a loan from the Bank   an asset shown in green on Chart 4. As with the SLS, the Fund is indemnified for losses by the Government. ###newline###  As we have noted, the expansion of the Bank s balance sheet, to a size that as a proportion of GDP is as large as at any time in the past two centuries, initially reflected an increase in our liquidity insurance operations, and subsequently the decision by the MPC to make asset purchases. When the time comes for the MPC to tighten monetary policy, it will be able to do so either by raising Bank Rate, or by selling assets back to the market, or by some combination of the two. As and when assets are sold, reserves balances will fall accordingly, and that will tend to cause the balance sheet to contract. Independent of the operation of monetary policy, the Bank will continue the schemes to undertake operations in corporate debt, for as long as they are judged to be necessary. The overall size of the balance sheet may well not fall back all the way to pre-crisis levels. Not least because banks may choose to hold higher reserves balances than before the crisis. One motivation for this might be to help meet the more demanding liquidity requirements recently proposed by the FSA. The Bank has also recently expanded the range of firms that are eligible to hold reserves accounts, to include smaller banks in order to help them to manage their liquidity. Previously only those with  Eligible Liabilities  of  500 million and who therefore paid Cash Ratio Deposits to the Bank were eligible for reserves accounts. Now, all firms that report under the CRD regime, regardless of their size, will be able to apply to hold a reserves account at the Bank. This potentially adds around 200 firms. The balance sheet impact of this for the Bank may be small, because even taken together these new balances will be relatively little. This is an important extension to the range of firms that is able to access the Bank s market-wide facilities. Of the liquidity insurance operations I have described, the transition back to a more normal situation is in some cases time-limited, and in others it is state-contingent. In the case of the SLS for example, the facility was introduced as a temporary measure and the last swaps will expire by end January 2012, at which point the SLS will be closed. The US dollar operations of the Bank and other major central banks were similarly intended to be a temporary measure in the context of exceptionally stressed market conditions. They are currently hardly being used but are due to run to 1 February. On the other hand, extended collateral long-term repo operations and the Discount Window Facility are intended to be permanent features of the liquidity insurance menu of the SMF. As Chart 4 shows, it is quite striking that, as the MPC expanded its purchases of assets, the participation in eLTRs has dropped. As we have forced the banks to hold ever more reserves and as market conditions have improved, their demand for liquidity through the eLTRs has reduced. In the eLTRs, the Bank sets a minimum yield for bids involving wider collateral. This is set at a level such that in non-stressed conditions it is more attractive to finance the collateral in the private repo markets. So, as stress in markets abates, there are price incentives built into the design that should result in a decline in participation in our operations. Similar principles apply to the DWF pricing. Unlike the extended collateral repos, the DWF is available on demand. The amount borrowed is determined by the counterparty, but at prices and on conditions determined in advance by the Bank. The prices are a function of the collateral type offered by the counterparty, and the amount of the counterparty s borrowing; and they increase as banks  borrowing increases, and/or is made against riskier collateral. Even at low levels of borrowing, however, the pricing structure is designed to be more expensive than is available in private markets in non-stressed circumstances. In this way, the pricing schedule for the Bank s provision of liquidity insurance is carefully balanced against the cost of the existence of insurance creating incentives for banks to take excessive liquidity risk. ###newline###  This talk has been quite detailed. But I hope that it has helped explain a number of points about the Bank s balance sheet and its operations since the crisis began. Here are a few conclusions you may like to take away: The extent of the Bank s support for the economy has been truly, historically, massive - both in terms of liquidity insurance operations and monetary policy. That shows up in the expanded size of our balance sheet. There has been an unprecedented pace of change and innovation in our facilities. Nevertheless, the schemes have been carefully designed to protect against losses impacting on the Bank. We can provide temporary short-term liquidity support to individual banks and to the system as a whole. And we can set expansive monetary conditions even when interest rates reach close to zero. But we can t provide medium-term funding for banks to carry out lending. That must ultimately come from private sector savings or, possibly, from Government. Similar principles apply to purchases of non-financial corporate assets in any significant scale. At some point, the large expansion in our balance sheet will have served its purpose, and we shall return to more normal times. The temporary facilities are either time limited or have price disincentives to use in normal conditions. The Bank s balance sheet will return to something like its former composition, and perhaps even its former size. Our work is not over yet, but the innovations introduced during the crisis should leave us much better prepared to deal with stresses in the future. ###newline###  But the framework also provides for the Bank of England to have its own separate pool of foreign exchange reserves which the MPC may use at its discretion to intervene in the support of its monetary policy objective   in other words, the Bank may intervene in foreign exchange markets as part of its operating framework for meeting the inflation target which the government sets for the MPC. The size of the Bank s reserves is modest compared with those of the Government, and stands at approximately $6 billion. The Bank finances the acquisition of its reserves by issuing foreign currency securities in its own name in the international capital markets. The currency denomination, maturity and size of this issue reflects the Bank s judgment on where the best value for money may be achieved. In recent years, issuance has taken the form of an annual syndication of a $2 billion 3-year bond. Intervention in foreign exchange markets by the UK is now very rare. That reflects the Government s monetary policy framework which sets the inflation target as the nominal anchor for the economy, and which allows the exchange rate to be market-determined. Prior to that, when the monetary policy framework included an exchange rate objective (either formally as in sterling s membership of the ERM, or informally as part of exchange rate shadowing) intervention by the Government was more common in support of that exchange rate objective. Another context in which the Government may use its foreign exchange reserves is that of participating in concerted international interventions, such as the G7 US dollar interventions in the 1980s. The Bank has not intervened in foreign exchange markets on its own account since the inception of the 1997 monetary policy framework. And over the same period, the Government has intervened using the EEA only once, in September 2000 as part of concerted international intervention to support the euro. ###newline###  Some of the Bank s capital and reserves are held in equity holdings, eg in the BIS and ECB and of course the Bank s physical assets. The remainder (the Bank s  free  capital), together with the proceeds of non-interest-bearing Cash Ratio Deposits placed with the Bank by UK-resident commercial banks are invested in a portfolio of sterling-denominated securities. The Bank also provides banking services for a small number of customers, mainly other central banks. These accounts appear as liabilities of the Bank and are placed back out in deposits.