 Some see the NE as synonymous with an acceleration in the diffusion of Information and Communications Technology (ICT). I prefer to ask whether the economy might, for a variety of reasons, have changed enough for it to be material for monetary policy. ###newline###  Some adherents of the NE have, in the past, claimed that the business cycle might become an anachronism. While this notion is increasingly suspect today, there is some evidence suggesting that the variance of output fluctuations has fallen significantly in the US and the UK. However, this might be a temporary phenomenon. Changes in confidence remain unpredictable, and technology spending cycles might now have greater amplitude. ###newline###  Perhaps the most persuasive reason for believing that our economies are behaving differently is the fact that, in both the US and the UK, economic forecasters have tended to simultaneously over-predict the level of unemployment and over-predict inflation since around . Factors like the exchange rate cannot, by themselves, explain this sequence and pattern of forecast errors. ###newline###  The evidence suggests that the observed forecast errors appear to be consistent with both, a fall in the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU), and various temporary factors (e.g. lower import prices). The NAIRU has plausibly fallen because of labour market reform and the intensification of product market competition. ###newline###  Academic studies are now growingly supportive of the notion that the underlying rate of productivity growth has, in recent years, increased in the US. These studies also suggest that ICT investment has played an important role. Indeed, there is some evidence suggesting that the growth contribution of ICT in the past  years outstrips that of electricity and railroads over comparable periods. In the UK, the contribution of ICT to productivity growth has risen significantly in recent years, but UK productivity growth actually decelerated in the - period. It is possible that the reduction in long-term unemployment, the high pound and measurement error have obscured the benefits from the NE for UK productivity growth. ###newline###  It is possible that an economic slowdown, a weaker stock market and some past over- investment might lead to a significant slowing in productivity growth. Historically, periods of significant technological change have sometimes been associated with significant volatility of share prices and corporate investment. For example, the average share price of electrical companies fell by around % after the  electrical mania and this did lead to a collapse in investment spending. However, it did not stop us from reaping the benefits of electricity eventually. Similarly, survey evidence suggests that UK business continue to expect e-business to become more important over the next few years. Interpreting productivity growth statistics through a downturn will require extreme care as it is possible that the NE might have increased the average growth rate of productivity while also increasing its cyclical variability. In any case, deriving accurate estimates of the cyclical contribution to productivity growth is virtually impossible. ###newline###  It is possible that measurement issues have led forecasters to overestimate inflationary pressures in the UK economy. For example, a preliminary set of estimates of the flow of capital services to industry has, in recent years, grown much faster than a conventional, wealth-based measure of the capital stock. Preliminary work suggests that this might have implied a lower level of  capacity utilisation  and, hence, less inflationary pressure in the Bank of England s Medium-Term Macroeconometric Model (MTMM). To take another example, if one makes alternative assumptions about the classification of software spending and also substituted US-style price indices for computers and software, then, preliminary, illustrative calculations suggest that productivity growth might have been underestimated by as much as . percentage points per annum over -. Preliminary work suggests that this alternative data would have lowered the estimate of the equilibrium rate of unemployment NAIRU in the MTMM by around . percentage points in  which, if interpreted mechanically, would have significantly lowered estimates of inflationary pressure. The ONS is working closely with the Bank to continue progress in the area of capital stock measures, and the issue of quality adjustment of computer prices was addressed in the Quality Review of Short Term Indicators of Output released by the ONS. We await further developments with keen interest. ###newline###  It is a great pleasure to be here today, on the occasion of the annual Travers Lecture. Developments in Information and Communications Technology (ICT, hereafter) have generated much excitement in recent years. Even allowing for the enthusiasm that might be expected from one of the pioneers, I recall being struck by the boldness of Mr Gates  claim in Davos earlier this year that ###newline###  Being awestruck by the technological advances we have seen also appears to go hand- in-hand with a belief that the economic benefits are likely to be correspondingly large. Hence, notwithstanding the significant decline in the share prices of technology companies over the last year, Mr Chambers, also speaking in Davos asserted that ###newline###  trade movement during the mid-th century. Indeed, much that might be different about the economy today relates not just to ICT advances, but also to the effects of globalisation, intensifying product market competition, labour market reform, financial market liberalisation and several other factors. A more appropriate characterisation of how a central banker might define the NE is, perhaps, that provided by Chairman Greenspan. ###newline###  I shall, therefore, discuss today some of the important ways in which our economies seem to be operating differently as compared to, say, the seventies and eighties. Although I do not always believe some of the more extravagant claims that are made for the NE, my best guess is that enough has changed for it to be material to the setting of monetary policy. ###newline###  In recent years, it had become increasingly fashionable to assert that recessions were a thing of the past. For example, consider the following quote from the Wall Street Journal in : ###newline###  Of course, since late last year, sentiment has deteriorated significantly, with increased concern about a recession in the US. While the notion that the business cycle might be dead might seem even more questionable now, the less extreme view that economies might have become more stable is clearly worth taking seriously. Figure  shows that a similar reduction in the volatility of output growth has also occurred in the UK. Table  shows, though, that unlike the US, little of the decline in the volatility of output is accounted for by stocks   instead, the largest arithmetical source of the decline in the volatility of GDP growth is what has happened to the volatility of consumption growth. A variety of possible factors could potentially explain the decline in the volatility of consumption growth, though one possibility is that financial liberalisation might have reduced the effect of credit constraint-induced lurches in consumption growth. Given that the stock-output ratio has fallen in the UK as well, and the wealth of anecdotal evidence on  just-in-time  stocks, it does, at first sight, seem surprising that stockbuilding has not become less volatile. This merits further research. ###newline###  Although the decline in observed output volatility is encouraging, it is appropriate to be cautious. First, one should recall that previous, long-lived economic expansions have led to the misplaced belief that lower volatility was here to stay, e.g. Browne () reminds us that, in , the US Commerce Department dropped the title,  Business Cycle Developments  from one of its publications, concluding that the business cycle was dead. Second, there are many other causes of recessions which are unaffected by the NE. For example, the sharpness of the fall of business and consumer confidence in the US in the last few months has been a surprise. However, Chairman Greenspan  reminds us that - ###newline###  Third, and perhaps most importantly, some of those who believe that we have a NE also think that the business cycle has not been repealed, but   been reincarnated in a different garb    . Michael Mandel, the economics editor of Business Week, a magazine that was early to forecast an upturn in productivity growth in the US, has recently published a book with the title  The Coming Internet Depression . He Specifically, if investment sags, productivity growth will slow, which might cause the stock market to fall. Of course, the fall in the stock market will further reduce investment and adversely affect the flow of venture capital, which, in turn, will reduce productivity growth further. Mandel draws specific attention to the fact that, historically, venture capital funding cycles have a significant amplitude   for example, between  and , first-round financing for new companies fell by %. We shall return to a discussion of Mandel s hypothesis when I consider the cyclicality of productivity growth below, but suffice it to say that there is nothing in the NE view, properly understood, to suggest that recessions will not occur. Historically, periods of rapid technological change have not been recession-free. That is why I have never fully understood authors who have argued that the NE can contribute to much higher share prices because it can rationalise a very low, or even ###newline###  Notwithstanding the re-emergence of recession risk and a higher equity risk premium, it is, nevertheless, true that the US and UK economies appear to have behaved differently in recent years, and it is to a consideration of this evidence that I turn next. ###newline###  Figure  compares the forecasts by Blue Chip panellists for unemployment and inflation in the US as compared to the actual out-turns over the - period. Note that forecasters have, for most of the period, over-predicted the level of the unemployment rate. Nonetheless, they have simultaneously over-predicted inflation until recently. Similarly, economic forecasters have been persistently too gloomy about the UK economy since the departure from the ERM. Table  displays the average forecast errors that have been made over this period. Focussing on the average of all forecasts (i.e.  the consensus ), notice that, on average, GDP growth has been underestimated by about .% pa, which is a large error in relation to the actual average annual growth rate of around .%. ###newline###  Before doing so, I note that some argue that the low inflation out-turns are attributable entirely to a strong exchange rate. I find that implausible as sterling was weak during the - period, and only strengthened significantly thereafter. Hence, the exchange rate can only potentially explain the surprisingly low inflation out-turns for a part of the sample period. Further, we are trying to explain the simultaneous occurrence of higher-than-expected GDP growth and lower-than-expected inflation. While an unexpectedly high exchange rate can readily explain surprisingly low inflation out-turns, in most standard macro-models, a stronger-than-expected exchange rate would cause lower-than-expected GDP growth (not higher-than- expected). Further, I have argued previously (see Wadhwani ()) that a part of the explanation of the strength of sterling versus the continental European currencies is the possibility that the UK has embraced the NE more readily than Europe. If true, then a part of the disinflationary impact of strong sterling can be attributed to the NE. I now turn to consider some direct evidence for the structural changes that underlie the NE hypothesis. ###newline###  An example of a structural change which might explain the pattern of observed forecast errors would be a fall in the so-called non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU hereafter). Of course, various alternative hypotheses have been advanced in an attempt to explain these facts. In the US, they include:- Temporary factorsIt is argued that lower import prices (a higher dollar, the Asian crisis etc) and decelerating health insurance costs have played an important role in temporarily depressing inflation, and that the NAIRU is actually higher than the current unemployment rate. A variant of this view argues that the acceleration of productivity growth in the s has not, as yet, been fully reflected into wages because wage aspirations respond slowly to increases in productivity growth.  As aspirations catch up, inflation will rise so the fall in unemployment may only be partially sustainable. Permanent Factors One might expect the fall in unemployment to be sustainable if the NAIRU has actually fallen for NE-type reasons. Now, the NAIRU might fall either because of improvements in the workings of the labour market, or because of the intensification of product market competition. In terms of the labour market, various hypotheses that have been advanced include changes in how people look for work (e.g. temporary help agencies), or differences in the demographic composition of the workforce.  The increased openness of the US economy, product market deregulation and, more recently, the Internet are all possible explanations for the widely-repeated perception of an intensification of product market competition, which might also have helped As one would imagine, various authors have attempted to trace the evolution of the NAIRU in the US, but given the well-known difficulties with this kind of work, obtaining a precise split between the rate of the temporary and permanent factors is difficult. However, I find it difficult to believe that temporary factors could entirely explain why inflation has been so benign even as unemployment has fallen. For instance, one needs a whole sequence of temporary factors for an eight-year period to explain what has happened. In any case, several studies point to some role for an enduring decline in the NAIRU. Turning to the UK, I have previously discussed the far-reaching changes that have occurred in the labour market over the last two decades (see Wadhwani (a)), so I will not have much to say on that topic today. However, Table  reminds us that, along a variety of dimensions, a great deal is different today (cf.  vs ). Union membership and strike activity are much lower. Imbalances in the pattern of labour demand and supply have diminished significantly. Turning to the unemployment benefits regime, the conventional replacement ratio (i.e. the ratio of out-of-work benefit to estimated in-work income) has fallen. Further, the New Deal, and other measures which have tightened the availability of benefits have also probably been influential. Also, Barwell () suggests that some of the decline in unemployment can be attributed to changes in the age structure of the labour force. It is notable that if one takes the wage equation that is to be found in the Bank of England s core macro-econometric model (see Bank of England (Sept )), then, there is evidence that it has over-predicted wage growth in recent years (i.e. since around ). ###newline###  *Annual (absolute) change in the ratio of employee jobs in the production and construction industries to total employee jobs. **Ratio of manufacturing firms reporting skilled labour shortages to those reporting shortages of other labour (source: CBI Industrial Trends Survey). It is sometimes pointed that while many of the labour market variables that are supposed to underlie the NAIRU changed during the - period, much of the evidence for a lower NAIRU appears to post-date . Hence, some argue that the changes in the labour market cannot be the explanation for the change in the NAIRU. On the other hand, industrial relations experts like Professor William Brown of Cambridge argue that the structural improvements in the labour market during the - period did not translate into improved wage performance until other catalytic events induced firms to undertake radical industrial relations change in the early s. Possible candidates as catalysts are the - recession, and the re-election of the government in , which implied that many of the structural changes in the labour market were not going to be reversed. There is case-study evidence in favour of both these factors having played some role (see e.g. Brown et al ()). Other possible catalytic events include the reduction in inflation expectations, which began during the recession in the early s, but was possibly aided by the adoption of an explicit inflation target after . Personally, I have no problem with the notion that structural changes can take time before they manifest themselves in improved macroeconomic performance. Any changes to the way labour is used (e.g. reforming pay systems, improving selection, etc) requires managerial effort, and takes time to put in place and be effective. Of course it is plausible that some of the improvement in the wage-unemployment trade-off during the late s in the UK is also attributable to temporary factors like lower import prices   caused by a combination of an appreciation of sterling, weak commodity prices during the - Asian crisis and possible supply-side improvement in other countries. Note though that the trade-off appeared to improve after the UK left the ERM in  even though a fall in sterling boosted import prices, so I am relatively confident that structural changes have also played a role. Of course, many of those who have been excited by the potential economic impact of ICT, typically think first of the impact on productivity   it is to a discussion of that issue that I turn next. ###newline###  As long ago as , various people were arguing (e.g. Business Week) that the NE had led to an acceleration of productivity growth in the US. This view was initially resisted by academic economists. Then, the view gradually evolved as a mixture of data revisions and the passage of time appeared to lead to a discernible change in the trend rate of measured productivity growth. Even then, there was some further resistance to accepting the possibility of a change in the rate of structural productivity growth. The rise in actual productivity growth was initially characterised as cyclical, then said to be confined only to the ICT-producing area, and then only to the durables manufacturing sector and so on. This is an active research area, and the debate continues to move ahead.  We know that non-farm labour productivity growth has increased from .% over -, to around .% in the - period. Although different studies disagree on the precise magnitudes, we also know that:- About one-third to one-half of the acceleration in labour productivity growth has come through the boom in corporate investment. Much of the capital deepening that occurred is largely accounted for by more ICT capital per head. At least some of this extra investment has occurred because the price of ICT capital was falling fast, in part, because of Moore s law, according to which the processing power of a silicon chip would double every  months. In terms of the remainder of the increase in productivity, different studies disagree about the relative importance of   The stage of the business cycle, with productivity growth tending to be higher in booms. Nevertheless, so far, the academic evidence in the US is growingly supportive of the notion that ICT investment has played an important role in increasing labour productivity growth in a variety of sectors of the economy, which is broadly consistent with predictions made by various NE advocates from around  onwards. Turning now to the UK, anecdotal evidence suggests that ICT investment has grown at a healthy rate in recent years   indeed, Table  suggests that, investment in software and telecoms equipment in the UK has matched or exceeded growth rates in the US in the last decade. While the UK has not matched the stunning % growth rate in computer investment in the US, investment in that area has nevertheless grown at a healthy clip (% pa). ###newline###  Table  displays the relative contribution of ICT to productivity growth in recent years. As one might expect, they show the contribution of ICT capital to productivity growth rising in both countries (from around .% in - to around % in the post- period in the US, and from .% in - to .% in - in the UK). The level of the ICT contribution is lower in the UK, in part because the income share of ICT inputs started at a lower level. However, notwithstanding the rising contribution from ICT, productivity growth in the UK decelerated in - vs the early s, while it accelerated in the US. This is puzzling. ###newline###  unemployed who were absorbed into employment over the - period were, on average, less productive on account of having lost skills during their spell of unemployment. On the basis of these hypotheses, one would argue that the benefits of ICT might have been obscured during the - period, and that as the adverse effects of a high pound wear off and/or the rate at which the long-term unemployed enter employment diminishes, productivity growth can be expected to pick up. Certainly, productivity growth has picked up more recently   the four-quarter growth rate is currently around .%. Another possibility is that measured productivity growth understates actual improvements in productivity. There are reasons to believe that this has been an important factor in the US (see, e.g. Corrrado and Slifman ()), where it is likely that productivity growth has been increasingly understated in recent years. Now, work on possible biases in the measurement of ICT in the UK suggests that GDP and labour productivity growth may have been understated by perhaps around . pp pa during - (that is already allowed for in the estimates in Table ). Of course, there may be other reasons for believing that productivity growth has been understated during the late s. I have previously discussed this issue at some length (see Wadhwani (b)), so I shall be brief here, but I would point to   Official data suggest that manufacturing productivity growth was zero during -, while survey responses from the CBI Pay Databank sample suggested productivity growth averaged around % pa over this period. No-one has satisfactorily explained why the measured deceleration in manufacturing productivity growth appeared to coincide with a rise in profitability (over the - period). Of course, more research is needed, but it is possible that measurement issues have obscured some of the benefits from the NE on UK productivity. ###newline###  Notwithstanding evidence that ICT technology has made a significant contribution to productivity growth, there has, of course, been a significant change in sentiment recently. For example, the Financial Times recently proclaimed: ###newline###  Of course, some of the rise in productivity growth that occurred in the US in recent years can be attributed to the fact that output growth was high. An above-average increase in output growth boosts productivity growth through higher utilisation and through returns-to-scale effects. Although it is virtually impossible to accurately estimate the precise impact of the cycle on productivity growth, some attempts to do so suggest that a significant proportion of the rise in productivity growth that we have seen cannot be directly attributed to the cycle. Nevertheless, with the US economy having decelerated significantly in recent months, it would be surprising if productivity growth did not decelerate for purely cyclical reasons, without that having any necessary implications for the NE view that the medium-term trend of productivity growth has risen. What happens next depends, in part, on how the stock market reacts to the slide in measured productivity growth. ###newline###  The fluctuations in the stock market affected the ability of the electrical industry to raise money, and thereby develop. Kennedy and Delargy () point out that while the prospective electrical supply undertakings raised over  m at the height of the mania in  alone, they were only able to raise around  , in the subsequent five year period, and they contend that - ###newline###  It is, though, easy to become excessively gloomy. Although share price volatility probably affected the time-path of investment in, say, electrical undertakings, it did not stop us from reaping the benefits of electricity eventually. Similarly, notwithstanding the possibility that the downturn in share prices depresses ICT-related investment for some time, one would still expect the benefits associated with ICT-related developments to be realised over the medium-term. In that regard, one might draw some comfort from a recent e-business survey conducted by the CBI which found that % of companies reported that e-business was already having a real impact on all aspects of the organisation, with % of respondents expecting some impact in the next - years. The proportion of turnover expected to be derived from e-business was expected to rise significantly over the next - years (see Table ). ###newline###  It is also plausible that Mandel () is too gloomy about the prospects for productivity growth in the US. Many firms feel that they have not, as yet, taken advantage of the new technologies at their disposal. Also, scientists claim that Moore s law is likely to continue to operate, so the falling price of ICT investment is likely to continue to stimulate spending. If it did turn out that a deceleration in GDP growth and/or the decline in share prices did lead to a pronounced decline in productivity growth, then there will be many who will proclaim that no sustainable increase in the growth rate of productivity had occurred in the US. Indeed, I have already noticed some commentators declare that the NE hypothesis will be seen to have failed if productivity growth in the US falls to levels associated with past cyclical downturns. This is mistaken. It is perfectly possible to envisage circumstances under which the NE has increased the average growth rate of productivity, but also simultaneously increased its cyclical variability. This could be true if, say, corporate investment had become more sensitive to movements in the stock market than in the past. This merits further investigation. In addition, if we have had a period of over-investment, one would expect the subsequent adjustment period to be characterised by unusually low investment, which might temporarily depress productivity growth, thereby masking an underlying improvement in the trend rate. I fear that, therefore, some of the conventional methods of cyclical adjustment for productivity growth may not be appropriate. For example,  Gordon s () method of cyclically adjusting labour productivity growth relies on a stable relationship between detrended (cyclical) changes in hours and corresponding cyclical changes in output. Yet, if the behaviour of, say, investment growth were different over this cycle relative to previous cycles, then it is not obvious that the hours-output relationship would remain stable.  Also, recall that pre-war US business cycles were quite different from the post- business cycle. For example, recessions during pre-war cycles were longer-lived, as they often arose from the bursting of speculative bubbles in the financial markets, and recessions were associated with the elimination of overhangs. By contrast, many of the post-war cycles have been associated with inflation-fighting by the Fed. There are those who argue that the current cycle more closely resembles the pre-war cycles. In any case, extrapolating longer-term growth trends on the basis of a period that includes a significant cyclical downturn can be a rather unreliable way of estimating long-term growth. Oulton () discusses the hypothetical situation of attempting to forecast US economic growth over the long term from the vantage point of being in . Table  sets out the average peak-to peak growth rates over selected periods. would have no idea that the US economy was poised to grow at the exceptionally healthy rate of .% over the subsequent  years. Indeed, the forecaster would have got closer to the final outturn by excluding the Depression altogether, though that would have been virtually impossible to do in . ###newline###   was the first  normal  year after World War .  was the last year before US entry into World War . ###newline###  I have discussed how the structural changes associated with the NE make it difficult to assess the underlying rate of productivity growth, or the equilibrium rate of unemployment (NAIRU). However, our problems are compounded by the potential existence of measurement error. Indeed, I wish to offer some examples of measurement error which have become more important as the amount of ICT investment has risen, making the setting of monetary policy even more challenging. I shall argue that the types of potential measurement error that I discuss below may have led us to significantly over-estimate the degree of inflationary pressure in recent years. There are those (see e.g., Krugman ()) who argue that the possibility that we may be understating productivity growth through mis-measurement should have no implications for our assessment of inflationary pressure as both actual and trend GDP growth are understated leaving our assessment of the output gap unchanged. However, I shall offer examples today where instances of potential measurement error are seen to have a material impact on our assessment of  capacity utilisation  and the NAIRU. ###newline###  At the Bank, one of our methods of computing the supply potential of the economy relies on summing the weighted growth rates of employment, the capital stock and technical progress. Among other things, it is obviously rather important to use a measure of the capital stock which reflects its productive potential when performing this calculation. Different methods of obtaining a measure of the capital stock can yield rather different results. For example, current ONS estimates of the capital stock are a so-called  wealth type measure , where each item is weighted by its current asset price. While this is a valid measure for balance sheet purposes, it will be less appropriate for an assessment of productive potential, where one might want to compute an index of the volume of capital services (IVCS hereafter) instead. Note that in the IVCS, each item of capital is, in principle, weighted by its contribution to output (i.e. its marginal revenue product) rather than its asset price. A consequence of using the IVCS is that it increases the weight accorded to shorter-lived assets such as machinery, equipment and software, relative to buildings. If the stocks of shorter-lived assets (e.g. computers) are growing more rapidly than other types, then the IVCS will, in turn, grow more rapidly than the wealth-based measure. Nicholas Oulton of the Bank of England has computed a preliminary measure of the IVCS, which may, for purely illustrative purposes, be compared to the wealth-based aggregate (see Figure ). Joint research with the ONS is ongoing on this issue. Note that the IVCS estimate has shown a rather higher growth rate in recent years, a period when we know that ICT investment accelerated. However, notice also that there are periods (e.g. the early s), when the wealth measure of the capital stock grew more quickly than the IVCS measure. Of course, there is no straightforward link between the rate of growth of the capital stock and estimates of potential output because changing one s view of the appropriate capital stock will also affect one s estimate of what economists call total factor productivity (TFP, hereafter). Nick Davey and Jennifer Greenslade of the MPC Unit at the Bank of England have examined these issues in the context of the Bank of England s Medium-Term Macroeconometric Model.  Because they use alternative capital stock data, various relationships have to be re-estimated. Their work is ongoing, but some interesting results from their pilot study include the possibility that the alternative capital stock data would have yielded a different picture for  capacity utilisation  in recent years - see Figure , which displays alternative proxy capacity utilisation series based on the wealth and the IVCS measures, respectively. I turn now to another example where the NE and potential measurement error-related issues interact in a way that makes monetary policy formulation quite difficult. ###newline###  There are various subtle issues relating to the appropriate measurement of ICT investment, some of which I discussed in an earlier speech (see Wadhwani (c)). Nicholas Oulton of the Bank of England has applied US methods for measuring ICT investment. He has used US price indices for computers and software, because they incorporate a substantial amount of research into adjustment for quality change. Because ICT products are extensively traded internationally, it is plausible that the rate at which quality adjusted prices are falling should be much the same in all countries (after adjustment for exchange rate changes). However, it should be noted also that the measurement of price indices for computers is conceptually very challenging due to the rate of technological change and no single approach of quality adjustment is without its drawbacks. Obviously, if inflation in computer and software is overstated in the UK, then real growth has been understated, since it is money values that are measured directly. Using US-style price indices should lead to higher estimates of ICT investment, GDP growth and productivity growth for the UK (as we discuss below). In the recently released National Statistics Quality Review report, there are some calculations which suggest that using US price indices for the computer industry (but not changing the assumptions regarding software), the level of industrial production in  Q would have been about % higher, with much of the gap being established in the post- period. There are those who believe that the ?hedonic price indices used by the US actually somewhat understate inflation, and this is clearly a controversial area. However, on the basis that it is important to be aware of the quantitative importance of alternative assumptions about price indices in the ICT sectors, I shall discuss some preliminary illustrative estimates of the potential biases in estimated GDP growth below. Note that there are other important differences between ICT measurement practices in the US and the UK which might also have the effect of understating the amount of ICT investment in the UK versus the US. For example, although the growth rate of nominal software investment (measured in current prices) is very similar in the US and the UK, there is a large discrepancy in the levels. Specifically, in the US, software investment has averaged % of computer investment, while, by contrast, the corresponding ratio was only % in the UK. Since people buy computers to run software, it seems very unlikely that there should be such a large discrepancy between the UK and the US. This striking difference in the estimated levels of software investment might arise because of differences in the interpretation of what is investment, and what is intermediate consumption in computer services   in the US, about three-fifths of the total products of the computer services industry is classified as investment   in the UK, the corresponding proportion is less than one-fifth. In some interesting recent work, the head of the National Accounts Department at INSEE in France, Lequiller () documents the fact that the proportion of software spending that is counted as being investment is substantially lower in the UK than in several European countries (e.g. France, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands), though he also points out that the corresponding proportion is higher in the US than in all European countries that he considers. Work on this issue is ongoing at the OECD. Oulton suggests, for illustrative purposes, that it might be appropriate to inflate the UK figure for software investment by a factor of , which is at the lower end of the possible range of grossing-up factors considered by him. Of course, this is an extremely difficult area, and because of the paucity of reliable information, what might seem a conservative assumption to someone, might appear to be too high to another. However, as a policymaker, it is important to be aware of the full range of possibilities, and it is in that spirit that I look at alternative illustrative computations of ICT investment. I also look forward to ongoing research into this issue at the ONS. Note that these adjustments imply that GDP growth may have been underestimated by as much as .pp pa over -. Importantly, for the assessment of underlying inflationary pressure in the economy, the size of the GDP growth bias has grown over time. Had the bias been constant over time, it would be unlikely to affect the results from a conventional econometric model. However, the GDP growth bias has risen from around .pp pa for - to about four times that in -. Further, and perhaps even more importantly, the software adjustment implies that nominal GDP growth has been understated as well as real GDP growth, and consequently, the labour share might be lower than is conventionally measured. Of course, in conventional macro-models (e.g. the Bank s MTMM or Batini, Nickell and Jackson ()), a lower labour share implies lower inflation. Hence, Davey- Greenslade find that allowing for the ICT adjustments in a macro-econometric model can have important implications for the assessment of inflationary pressure.  In particular, they find that, other things being equal, using the alternative data instead of the official data would have led to a lowering of the estimate of the NAIRU by around . percentage points in  (see Figure ), which could, if interpreted mechanically, have altered a -year ahead RPIX forecast made in  by as much as . percentage points. Their estimates of the impact of using the alternative numbers on ICT investment on the NAIRU has grown over time in recent years (see Figure ), e.g. the effect was close to zero in the early s, so it is possible that we have overestimated inflationary pressure to a growing extent in recent years. Of course, they have only undertaken a pilot study, so more research is necessary, but standard economic theory suggests that the direction of the bias to the inflation forecast should be in the same direction as what they find, though the actual estimate might change. Also, the preliminary estimates of the alternative data series are predicated on particular assumptions and are designed to be purely illustrative. It is possible that further work (with the active and essential cooperation of the ONS) might lead to different point estimates of the size of the biases in GDP growth. However, the direction of the bias in GDP estimates and the direction in which the bias is moving seem relatively uncontroversial and as policymakers, it is important for us to be aware of them. One reason that I have spent so much time today on what might seem like a relatively arcane discussion of the intricacies of how we measure things, is that I suspect that this might, in part, explain why economic forecasters have overestimated the degree of inflationary pressure while having simultaneously underestimated growth in the s. ###newline###  Today, we have discussed how the NE has changed some of the underlying relationships that we rely on for the purposes of monetary policy, and have also considered possible implications for how we measure things. However, we also saw that some of the claims that have been made for the NE are far too extravagant. There is much about the NE that remains uncertain, and therefore, I look forward to learning more over the next few years. ###newline###  Batini, N, S J Nickell and B Jackson (), Inflation Dynamics and the Labour Share in the UK , External MPC Unit, Discussion Paper No . Bosworth, Barry P and Jack E Triplett  What s New About the New Economy? ICT, Economic Growth and Productivity , Brookings Institute, mimeo.