 I would like to thank Alina Barnett and Richard Windram for research assistance and I am also grateful for helpful comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. Perhaps the first thing to say is that the widening of the current account deficit is not, in fact, the result of a worsening trade performance. Despite a much weaker recovery in the UK s trading partners than at home, the gap between exports and imports has actually narrowed slightly over the past few years (Chart ). That s due mainly to surprisingly weak imports (Chart ). It s possible that this reflects the lagged effects of sterling s depreciation. At any rate, the trade deficit has got a little smaller, relative to GDP, and the cause of the deterioration in the current account is, instead, a sharp drop in the net income received on the UK s overseas balance sheet. The spread between the annual yield on overseas assets   foreign assets owned by UK-based institutions   and that on UK liabilities (foreign claims on those UK institutions) has fallen by around bp over the past couple of years (Chart ). That might not seem much. But when you have an overseas balance sheet as large as the UK s, both sides of which are worth around six times annual GDP (Chart ), shifts like these can matter. It is this balance sheet, and its consequences, I want to focus on today. First, while the UK has run a current account deficit most of the past twenty years, the stock of net foreign assets (NFA) has been broadly unchanged. This is because capital gains on the assets have exceeded those on liabilities: commensurate with the premium earned on risky assets. Marked to market, the UK s net foreign asset position looks to be positive. Second, the net asset position has some bearing on the empirical relationship between the current account deficit and subsequent rates of growth. Countries with a healthier net foreign asset position are less likely to experience financial crises; they are also less prone to the precipitate reversals in current account deficits    sudden stops  in overseas funding   that can prove very damaging for demand and economic activity. I don t think we should be terribly surprised by this: just as they are to an individual institution, investors are more willing to cover a country s deficit the sounder the underlying asset position. But it does mean that the interpretation of the deficit depends on its context. Third, the UK s ability to earn more on its overseas assets than it pays on its liabilities may depend in part on the credibility of our economic policy. For many years after the  crisis, right up to sterling s ejection from the ERM in  and the introduction of inflation targeting and rules-based fiscal policy that followed, domestic interest rates were significantly higher than in other developed countries. This meant the return on our liabilities   both the yield and the total return   was higher than on our assets (Charts  and ). I don t believe we ve slipped back to that pre- state. But, against the backdrop of what is a very large overseas balance sheet, the drop in net income in the past couple of years does illustrate the importance of a credible framework for macroeconomic policy. I ll go through the first two points in more detail. My conclusions will focus mainly on the third. ###newline###  Our overseas balance sheet wasn t always as large as now. Official estimates go back to the late s: at that time both foreign assets held by UK-registered institutions and foreign claims on the UK were worth barely % of annual GDP (Chart ). Successive devaluations increased the sterling value of both sides and the value of the balance sheet grew to % of GDP by the early s. The end of capital controls, and the growth of international capital markets, led to a steeper increase over the following twenty years, to % of GDP in the early part of the last decade. The balance sheet then more than doubled in size during the banking boom that took place over the following few years (you can see the share of the balance sheet accounted for by UK-registered banks in Chart ). What happened after that boom doesn t need re-telling: we learned again the dangers of overstretched balance sheets, particular for institutions whose assets are riskier and less liquid than their liabilities (i.e. the banks). I would caution strongly, however, against drawing a parallel between the position of an individual institution, within which there can be significant mismatches between assets and liabilities, and the risks involved in a country s foreign balance sheet. What matters in this case is whether such mismatches exist across national borders. By and large, they do not   not, at least, on remotely the same scale as for an individual institution. What s striking about Chart  is not how dissimilar are the compositions of the two sides of the balance sheet, but how similar they are. This is the main reason for the tight co-movement of assets and liabilities in Chart . That said, and although these charts barely reveal them to the naked eye, there are nonetheless some significant differences: Overweight risky assets. High-profile takeovers of British companies often generate a great deal of political attention. But the FDI and equity investments in the UK have long been outweighed by what UK-based institutions own overseas. The imbalance means net returns are volatile: they rise and fall with global equity returns. It also means that, looking through these swings, and even if in aggregate net assets are zero, you d expect on average to earn positive net returns, commensurate with the risk premium typically earned on these investments. To the extent they are in the form of capital gains rather than dividends, these excess returns wouldn t show up in the current account. Overweight maturity: The bulk of the balance sheet, on both sides, is accounted for by fixed-income assets, either short-term deposits or longer-term debt. Today these are well matched. But for much of the past twenty years, the net position has been skewed towards longer-term debt and away from shorter-term deposits. To the extent there s any slope in the global yield curve this imbalance will tend to generate small positive returns on the current account   UK institutions earn a  carry  (as with equities, this is merely the compensation for the extra risk involved in the position). The carry will eventually decline if yield curves flatten, although in the process the balance sheet will see net capital gains (again unrecorded in the current account). Underweight sterling: In many instances UK investments overseas are hedged against currency risk. But the hedging isn t complete. For example, foreign reserve managers own significant amounts of UK government debt, all of it denominated in sterling, but the UK s own official reserves are smaller. Some of the long-standing FDI investments, owned by UK-based multinationals or pension funds, are also unhedged. So the UK as a whole is underweight its own currency. There s no reason to expect this to generate net returns over the future. But, ex post, it does expose the sterling value of the balance sheet to significant capital gains (losses) when the currency depreciates (appreciates). These differences help to explain the recent pattern of returns. Weak growth in the UK s trading partners, above all the euro area, has depressed interest and dividend receipts on foreign assets. Equity prices have nonetheless risen everywhere, resulting in net capital gains on a balance sheet that s slightly long risky assets. On both sides the moves are larger than one might have expected   income has fallen by more than global profits, capital gains have been larger than in global equity indices   but directionally, at least, they seem reasonable. The compositional differences also explain quite a bit of the variation in net returns over longer periods of time. Chart  reproduces from Chart  the net total return on the balance sheet, only this time plots it over three-year rolling periods. The other line is an estimate of the portion of the gap due to these compositional differences. The detailed data that allow us to do this exist only from , which is why the graph starts only in . But, at least since then, the fit is reasonably good. You can see the effect of sterling s depreciation in the early part of the sample   because the balance sheet is short the domestic currency this boosted net returns over that period   and the opposite effect of the re-appreciation some years later. The broad path of risky asset prices, up before the crisis and down since, is also apparent in both lines. Why might this be? You find the same pattern   low sovereign interest rates and positive net returns   in the United States. And for that country, some economists have inferred that these represent payment for the status of the dollar in international transactions: it s the monetary return on what Val ry Giscard d Estaing   then foreign minister and later the president of France   once referred to as the  the exorbitant privilege  of having a reserve currency. Maybe so. But if the UK does have such a privilege it s probably not one it s enjoyed forever. From the late seventies until the mid-s, it cost more to borrow in sterling than in other currencies and, on average, there were negative returns on the balance sheet (Chart ). We don t have the data to say whether this reflected compositional effects, but I doubt it. At least over the period as a whole, the real value of sterling was broadly stable and risky asset prices did very well. If anything, that would have led you to expect positive net returns. This suggests something else may have changed, in a way that affected net returns, during the s. I will return to this pattern, and to the institutional factors that might influence net returns, in the conclusion. ###newline###  In the meantime, I want to say a little bit about the relationship between the overseas deficit and economic growth. This is where we started. Arguably, it s also closer to what Giscard d Estaing meant by  exorbitant privilege    he was referring not so much the excess return on the US s foreign assets but its ability to run current account deficits for longer than might otherwise be the case. The claim was that the ability to issue a reserve currency made the US less prone to the sudden reversals in its overseas balance that were so damaging for other economies. Once you allow for a degree of non-linearity, however, the link is clearer. Chart  plots the path of growth before and during sharp corrections in the current account deficit, defined as an improvement of at least % of GDP within three years. As one might expect, these reversals are more likely the higher the starting point (fewer countries experience jumps in the current account balance from a position of a surplus). Their implications for economic growth are also more evident than in the full sample. It turns out that the likelihood of a sudden reversal is smaller the healthier the underlying net asset position (Chart ): unsurprisingly, international investors are more tolerant of a negative flow the better the underlying stock position. As you can see from Chart , reversals have worse effects in emerging than in developed countries, at least in the first instance. The effects are also milder for countries with floating exchange rates. All these points are relevant for the UK. ###newline###  As we saw right at the start the current account deficit is significantly larger than at the time of the UK s many post-war currency crises in the s, s and s. Throughout those times, and particularly in the Today, at least, I think most economists would probably see things the other way around. Liquid liabilities can amplify the risks from investor concerns about an institution s underlying solvency. Just ask Northern Rock. But it s the fundamentals   in this case rapid inflation and a rising government deficit   that come first. At a time when inflation was % points higher than short-term interest rates, which were set by the government, when the government itself was running a structural deficit of almost % of GDP, and when there seemed little political appetite to incur the cost of bringing either under control, you could surely forgive the owners of these balances for wondering whether they were worth holding onto (Chart ). At any rate, many didn t do so. And even if not its fundamental cause, the resulting withdrawals were an accelerant of the crisis through that year. By the time official interest rates did start to go up aggressively, in the autumn of , the government was already in negotiations for a loan from the IMF, with all its stringent conditions attached. The  crisis obviously had a momentous political impact. I think you can also see its economic effects, for many years afterwards, in the cost of sterling debt. Inflation was subsequently brought under a degree of control, during the early s. But, with inflation expectations relatively high, sterling interest rates remained well above those in the rest of the developed world, and for many years there was a significant net deficit on the UK s overseas balance sheet. That only started to turn around during the s when, after yet another sterling crisis, in    this one related to our short-lived membership of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism   the UK adopted first an inflation target and then a rules-based approach to fiscal policy. There were surely other contributors to the turnaround. It was during the s that fast-growing emerging economies started to have a positive impact on global activity and risky asset returns. Because they had a higher propensity to save, they also contributed to the decline in global interest rates. Both trends will have profited the UK s overseas balance sheet. The years from - also saw an extraordinary boom in the activities of international banks, many of them based in the UK. If these institutions were taking more risk onto their non-UK balance sheets than at home   and that s what the pattern of subsequent losses would suggest   perhaps it s not surprising that, at least until the disaster that followed, there should have been a corresponding excess return. And yet what is striking is that, even since the crisis, the UK s overseas balance sheet has continued to perform relatively well. Despite being long equity and short debt, despite there being a far greater quantity of foreign-held sterling deposits in  than there were sterling balances in , foreign assets have continued to pay out more than foreign claims on the UK. And to say this partly reflects the depreciation   which, arithmetically speaking, it does   only begs a question about how that could have happened without putting pressure on sterling risk premia and interest rates, as it did after the  crisis. I suspect that the answer lies, in part, with the institutional reforms of the s and the rules-based approach to macroeconomic policy they established. None of this means that today s deficit is irrelevant for growth. It exists partly because the rest of the UK-trade-weighted world, the rest of Europe in particular, hasn t yet recovered as rapidly. If the global economy remains sluggish, it will inevitably be harder for an open economy like the UK to achieve both strong and balanced growth. That s why the IMF judged after its recent Article IV consultation that, relative to its long-run sustainable level, sterling s exchange rate is  modestly overvalued . It s also, in part, why the MPC expects UK output growth to soften a little over the future. But that s a long way from saying the current account deficit poses some independent, existential threat to UK growth. For one thing, it has been outweighed in the past couple of years by capital gains on the overseas balance sheet, and although their size is unusual, their direction is not. We know too that having a balanced net asset position seems to reduce the threat from a large current account deficit, as does a floating currency. Most important, the UK has in place a hard-won policy framework that didn t exist when it went through the traumas of the  crisis. This is something that should never be taken for granted.