 The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) at the Bank of England has an explicit mandate  to maintain CPI inflation at a target of 2%. In such an inflation targeting  regime,  the  effectiveness of monetary policy is likely to be greater if inflation expectations remain anchored  to the target. People have to believe that there will be low inflation before they stop building expectations of high inflation into their decision-making process. A sustained rise in inflation expectations in the short-term runs the risk of heightened inflationary pressures in the medium term. Hence, central banks have an incentive to understand how inflation expectations  are  formed. The formation of inflation expectations is likely to be related to the credibility of the monetary authority in controlling inflation. We therefore also consider micro data on individuals  satisfaction with the Bank of England in its job to control inflation. We also consider the characteristics of those individuals more likely to accurately report current rates of inflation and predict future inflation. We find the credibility of the monetary authority differs  across  individuals according to similar characteristics as those that form their inflation expectations and in their ability to report and predict inflation. In section 2 we discuss how inflation expectations may be measured and recent  movements in inflation expectations. In section 3 we discuss the empirical literature concerning the formation of inflation expectations. Section 4 describes the empirical evidence for the UK drawn from a number of surveys of UK households  inflation expectations. Section 5 concludes. ###newline###  What matters most for inflation, are the expectations of those directly involved in setting prices and wages.   Wages are set on an infrequent basis, thus wage setters have to form a view   on future inflation. If inflation is expected to be persistently higher in the future, employees may seek higher nominal  wages in order to maintain their purchasing  power.  This in turn could lead to upward pressure on companies  output prices, and hence higher  consumer  prices.  Additionally, if companies expect general inflation to be higher in the future, they may be more inclined to raise prices, believing that they can do so without suffering a drop in demand for their output. A third path by which inflation expectations could potentially impact inflation is through their influence on consumption and investment decisions. For a given path of nominal market interest rates, if households and companies expect higher inflation, this implies lower expected real interest rates, making spending more attractive relative to saving. But if nominal market interest rates rise in response to expectations that the MPC will raise Bank Rate to curtail any inflationary pressure, real rates might not actually decline. How can we measure inflation expectations?  Mankiw, Reis and Wolfers (2003) provide   a comprehensive study. We identify three main groups, namely survey-based measures, market- based measures and economic indicators. In the UK there are a range of surveys of inflation expectations, both of the general public and professional economic forecasters and academics. There is a dearth of surveys for firms  inflation expectations although business surveys include questions concerning firms  pricing intentions. In this paper we examine  in  detail those surveys of the general public for which we can obtain micro data. Market-based measures of inflation expectations include estimations of nominal and real forward interest rate curves, from which a forward inflation curve is inferred, and inflation swap rates. In both these cases, the indicators may not only reflect markets  inflation expectations but also inflation risk premia and numerous other market factors. Movements  in  inflation expectations could also be apparent in economic indicators such as wage settlements,  where  wage bargainers must make some judgment regarding the course of inflation over the period of  the settlement. Of course, wage settlement data does not simply reflect inflation expectations but also factors such as ability to pay and employee productivity. How have the survey measures of inflation expectations we study in this paper behaved over the recent past. Chart 1 illustrates that a range of survey measures of household s inflation expectations have picked up sharply over the recent past, before falling back in the most recent surveys. Charts 2 and 3 illustrate the median inflation expectation from the Bank of  England/NOP Inflation Attitudes Survey, together with consumer price inflation (CPI) and retail price inflation (RPIX).1 The difference between these two measures is twofold. First, the CPI measure is calculated using a geometric rather than an arithmetic average. Second, the RPIX measure includes a measure of housing costs, whereas the CPI does not. Finally, up until the beginning of 2004 the Bank of England s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC)  set  monetary policy relative to a target of 2.5% for the RPIX measure. Since 2004 the MPC has set monetary policy relative to a target of 2.0% for the CPI measure. Hence, this change in target means it is difficult to judge how inflation expectations have behaved relative to the Bank of England s inflation targeting regime. It appears that up to 2004 at least that the median inflation expectation in the Bank of England Inflation Attitudes survey was closer to the RPIX inflation measure  (Chart 3) than it was to CPI (Chart 2). Over the recent past RPIX inflation has fallen below CPI inflation, and a third measure of retail price inflation which includes mortgage interest payments, the RPI, has fallen below zero following large cuts in the Bank of England s policy rate (Chart 4). This could suggest that    some agents in the economy may perceive different rates of inflation; in particular, mortgage holders who will have seen their mortgage interest payments fall sharply in the recent past. Our survey measures of inflation expectations and perceptions do not specify a particular measure of inflation. So we must be careful in assessing the behavior of inflation expectations and  perceptions relative to the Bank of England s target. Despite these caveats there are a number of key points with respect to the behavior of inflation expectations we should highlight. First, median inflation expectations remained broadly stable, in the range of 2%-3%, through the period 1999-2006 as the Bank of England maintained inflation close to target. Second, during this period inflation expectations moved closely with inflation perceptions (Chart 5). This could be consistent with backward-looking behavior by agents in forming their inflation expectations, but also with forward-looking behavior in  the  sense that agents expected the Bank of England to maintain inflation close to target. Third, as rising oil, energy and food prices pushed CPI inflation above the inflation target to a peak of 5.2% in September 2008, this coincided with a rise in median inflation expectations. Median inflation expectations picked up sharply, though not as much as actual inflation on all three measures, through 2007-2008 before falling back very sharply to their lowest level since 2005 in February 2009. Fourth, the survey responses have become more volatile in the last two years. Charts 6 and 7 illustrate a swathe of distributions of the survey responses to the Bank of England Inflation Attitudes survey in the periods 2001-2006 and 2007-2009 respectively. Table    1 illustrates the entire distribution of responses. In the May and August 2008 surveys 37% and 36% of respondents expected inflation to be greater than 5% in twelve months time, but this proportion fell to 21% and 16% in the November 2008 and February 2009 surveys. Between August and November 2008 the proportion of respondents expecting prices to not change or go down rose from 6% to 27%. Hence, in our analysis of the Bank/NOP micro data we consider the behavior of respondents in two distinct periods. First, in the period when inflation remained close to Bank of England s target in 2001-2006 and second, in the period 2007-2009 when inflation has exceeded the target by more than 1.0pp and the volatility of both inflation and surveyed inflation expectations has increased. It is worth considering how wages may have responded to inflation expectations. Chart 8 illustrates that wage settlements showed little response to both the rise in CPI inflation or median inflation expectations over the course of 2008. Rather, wage growth began to fall back as firms cut back on hiring. And over the recent past sharp cuts in bonuses have pushed down on the AEI measure of average earnings. In summary, it has been difficult to detect any strong link between wage settlements, earnings or survey measures of inflation expectations. ###newline###  In the neo-Keynesian model (see, for example, Clarida et al. 2000), sticky prices result in forward looking behaviour; inflation today is a function  of expected  future inflation as well as  the pressure of demand, captured in an output gap term. Thus, expectations are deemed to be an important link in the monetary transmission mechanism. Monetary policy can be more successful when long-term inflation expectations are well anchored. Hence, many studies have focused on the question of how to assess the response of inflation expectations to macroeconomic shocks, and whether this is likely to be lower  in  inflation targeting regimes.2 Bernanke (2007) provides an intuitive definition for anchored inflation expectations, namely that if the public experiences a spell of inflation higher than their long run expectation, but their long run expectation of inflation changes little as a result, inflation expectations can be considered to be well anchored. However, if the public reacts to  a  short period of higher than expected inflation by increasing their long run expectations, expectations   are poorly anchored. Levin, Natalucci and Piger (2004) show that some survey measures of inflation expectations in the US respond to recent changes in the actual rate of inflation, which would not be the case if expectations were perfectly anchored. They examine  whether  inflation  expectations are relatively more anchored in inflation targeting economies by  estimating  a  pooled regression (across inflation targeting and non-inflation targeting countries) in order to evaluate the sensitivity of inflation expectations to realised inflation. They find that longer-run inflation expectations have been far less sensitive in inflation targeting countries, suggesting that inflation targeting central banks have been quite successful in de-linking expectations from realised inflation. The authors find some evidence that inflation persistence (for core CPI) is higher amongst non-inflation targeting countries. In two empirical studies using expectations based on market data Gurnayak et al (2002, 2003) provide evidence that US nominal forward rates at long horizons react significantly to surprises in macroeconomic data releases and monetary policy announcements, while forward rates derived from inflation-indexed Treasury debt show little sensitivity to these shocks. This suggests the response of nominal forward rates is mostly driven by changes in inflation expectations. However, they note that in the UK long-term forward rates have not demonstrated excess sensitivity since the Bank of England achieved independence.  Mishkin (2007) notes that  in the US inflation persistence rose during the 1970s and has subsequently fallen back consistent with a re-anchoring of inflation expectations. This hypothesis is consistent  with  various indicators of inflation expectations, for example estimates of inflation  compensation  derived from indexed Treasury yields.3 However, although there may be some consensus that inflation expectations have become more anchored, and perhaps more so in inflation targeting countries, these studies do not  explicitly consider how inflation expectations are themselves formed. Rational expectations has been the traditional framework used for modeling inflation targeting.  Agents are assumed to  share a common information set and form expectations conditional on that information. Thus, we assume that everyone has the same expectations. However, this implies the public has firm knowledge of the long-run equilibrium inflation rate. This gives rise to a conflict between policy practice and policy modeling, which is well described by Orphanides and Williams (2003). Generally, models assume a fixed and perfectly known structure of the economy and specify that expectations are model consistent. In linear fixed parameter models, for example, once the monetary policy rule is specified, inflation expectations can be represented as a fixed linear function of economic outcomes. Economic agents are then assumed to form expectations mechanically based on these simple linear functions of economic outcomes that are assumed to   be perfectly known. In such a world, expectations are perfectly anchored, and as such there is no need for central banks to monitor and analyse information regarding inflation expectations, and   no need for central bank communications. However, once imperfect knowledge is acknowledged, the mechanical link from  economic outcomes to the expectations formation process breaks down. There have been a large number of papers documenting the general failure of the rational expectations hypothesis to account for the survey data on inflation expectations (for example Pacquet, 1992, Batchelor and Dua, 1987). A widely cited explanation for the failure is that agents lack the sophistication to  form expectations rationally. The presence of information costs is a major factor. To  form  rational expectations, agents must know the time structure and probability distribution of the economy, and the costs of information may exceed the benefits, making it rational for agents to form their expectations some other way. Most empirical tests of rationality of surveyed expectations have focused on the inflationary expectations of economists (e.g.  Keane  and  Runkle, 1990), although a few studies have examined inflationary expectations of consumers in general, mainly using aggregated Michigan survey data (Maddala, Fishe and Lahiri (1981), Gramlich (1983), Batchelor (1986)). However, these studies suffer from aggregation bias, meaning that the implications of tests for individual rationality are difficult to derive. More recently, a few studies have attempted to empirically test rationality of expectation formation on an individual basis (Bakhshi and Yates (1988) provide a review of tests of  rationality commonly used in the literature). Souleles (2004), for example, seeks to  test  rationality of consumer expectations (including inflation expectations) by looking at the relationship between answers to the US Michigan survey over a number of years, in order to capture an individual s expectational error. They find that expectations appear to have been  biased, but that the bias is inconsistent, and related to inflation regime and business cycle. In a similar approach to Souleles (2004), Mitchell and Weale (2007) use the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS) to test the rationality of individual-level expectational data in Britain. They statistically identify the characteristics of individuals for whom the costs  of  forming rational expectations exceed the benefits. They find that the British are more optimistic about the future when they have recently seen their  household income rise, and vice versa.    Using a regime switching model, they find that 40% of individuals form expectations consistent with rationality, and that the propensity to form rational expectations increases with age rather than education. However, they do not investigate the alternative model used by the other 60% to form their expectations. Another class of study has investigated empirically the increasing consensus that expectation formation is heterogeneous across agents. Three main possible reasons for this heterogeneity have been proposed.  First, reliance of agents on different models; second, the use  of different information sets by agents; and third, agents have different capacities for processing information. Using US Michigan data, Branch (2004) finds evidence that agents rely on different models and use different information sets. He looks at rationally heterogeneous expectations, stemming from the notion of Adaptively Rational Equilibrium Dynamics (ARED) proposed by Brock and Hommes (1997). Under this framework, agents forecast inflation rates using a predictor function chosen from an increasingly sophisticated set of alternative predictors; the probability of any predictor being chosen depends on its relative net benefit.   His results   show that agents do dynamically select predictor functions. This suggests that rational expectations are not rejected because agents blindly follow an ad-hoc rule; rather because it is    not worthwhile for them to invest the effort to use more complex predictor functions. Agents are rationally heterogeneous in the sense that each predictor choice is individually optimal. Carroll (2003) focuses on the idea that agents use different data sets to form expectations. He proposes an epidemiology framework to study how households model inflation expectations. In the framework, household expectations are updated probabilistically towards the views of professional forecasters   i.e. people obtain macroeconomic news from the media, but  that  it takes time to dissipate. He finds differences between household expectations and the views of professional forecasters narrow when inflation is more significant, probably because of increased media coverage and household interest. His model is successful in capturing much  of  the variation in the Michigan survey measures of inflation expectations. Models of learning allow us to abstract from the idea that agents have full information about the economy and the objectives of the central bank; instead individuals make statistical inferences about the unknown parameters governing the evolution of the economy. Pfajfar and Santoro (2006) focus on learning and information stickiness as the roots of the heterogeneity in expectation formation between agents. Using data from the Michigan survey, they identify three regions of a distribution corresponding to different expectation formation processes, which display a heterogeneous response to the main macroeconomic indicators.   On the left hand side   of the distribution, a static or lightly autoregressive group, in the middle a nearly rational group, and on the right hand side a group of agents behaving according to adaptive learning and sticky information. The latter respond in too pessimistic a manner, overacting to macroeconomic fluctuations. Similar to Carroll (2003), they find that agents are more  likely  to  update information sets regularly when inflation matters. Pfajfar and Santoro (2008) extend  this  approach to different demographic groups. They find that income, education and gender are important characteristics when forecasting inflation. Those with higher income, education and male agents tend to make smaller errors in their inflation forecasts. Orphanides and Williams (2003) also look at the implications of learning. They find that the presence of learning increases the sensitivity of inflation expectations and the term structure   of interest rates to economic shocks, in line with empirical evidence. They find that inflation expectations under learning are much less sensitive to inflation when the inflation target is assumed to be known by the public, indicating that the benefit of better anchored inflation expectations that is associated with successful communication of the central bank s  inflation target can be significant. This is consistent with the experience of the UK following the adoption of inflation targeting. ###newline###  We now turn to empirical evidence on the formation of inflation expectations among the UK population. Survey responses may be highly influenced by the structure and precise nature of the questions asked. So we consider evidence from a range of surveys conducted in the UK   where respondents provide quantitative, qualitative and point estimates for their inflation expectations. We find consistent characteristics such as age, education and relative income influence the formation of inflation expectations. Of course, inflation expectations should be highly influenced by monetary policy. We find that similar characteristics, as those that lead to lower inflation expectations, are also associated with confidence in the Bank of England  to control inflation. ###newline###  Since 1999 the Bank of England has conducted a regular survey of attitudes to inflation expectations. Each survey covers around 2000 individuals, with an additional 2000 taking part in an extended survey every February. The sample is designed and weighted to ensure that it is representative of the known population data on age, gender, social class and region. Aggregated data are available quarterly from November 19994. We have obtained the micro data at the level  of the individual from twenty seven of these quarterly surveys, beginning in February 2001 through to February 2009. These are not panels; the same people are not interviewed repeatedly, rather they are repeat cross-sections. We have pooled these surveys together. In total there are 64,334 responses. In each survey the following question is asked "How much would you expect prices in the shops generally to change over the next 12 months?  The full distribution of responses is presented in Table 1. The median response has risen from a low of 1.7% in November 2001 to a high of 4.4%  in August 2008, but has fallen back very sharply to 2.1% in the February 2009 survey. Chart 5 suggests that up to 2007 median inflation expectations had been largely  backward-looking. Indeed, up to 2007 on average 49.9% of respondents indicated that their  expectations  for  inflation were in the same range as their perceptions of current inflation. This may not be too surprising in a period when the Bank of England succeeded in maintaining inflation close to  target. Given the costs of predicting inflation, imperfect information sets and capacity to form  such projections a backward-looking rule of thumb may not have been irrational when consumer price inflation was relatively stable. It is important to examine the distribution of non-responses because if it is non-random it may bias any results. Table 2 illustrates the non-responses to the inflation expectations question. The equation estimated is a dprobit to calculate the probability that respondents will reply that they have  no idea .5 If the respondent reported they had 'no idea' the dependent variable was set  to one, zero otherwise. Worryingly the probability of a non-response is higher for females, the young, the less educated, those on lowest incomes, not in employment and those renting accommodation6. The concern is that any results may be biased because of the relative exclusion of these groups. So we proceed with caution. In the first column of Table 3 we simply include survey month dummies. A number of facts stand out:  first, there is relatively little movement in the size of the coefficients on the  month dummies up to the period 2007-2009. Second, there was a dramatic increase in the size of the coefficients as the impact of the oil shock hit from November 2007 to August 2008. Third,   the rapid deterioration in the size of the coefficients in the last two surveys. February 2009 is insignificantly different from February 2001. Column 2 adds controls for age, gender, education, employment and housing status. It is striking that the time series patterns of the survey date dummies change little. Inflation expectations tend to rise with age up to 65. The least educated  and those in rented accommodation also report higher expected inflation rates. There is no significant difference in the inflation expectations of workers and non-workers.  Males tend to have higher inflation expectations, but we take this result with caution as it is not robust across different specifications of the equation, and subject to the caveat regarding the non-responses of females. What can we say about the recent divergence in perceptions and  expectations  of  inflation? Column 3 re-estimates the equation in column 2 but restricts itself to data taken from  the most recent survey in February 2009.8 The main difference between the coefficients on the control variables is the big increase in the absolute size of the coefficient for those individuals  who have a mortgage who may have seen big declines in their mortgage interest payments following cuts in the Bank of England s policy rate. The coefficients on education dummies are more negative in February 2009 than in the earlier period. This could suggest that those with higher education are less likely to base their inflation expectations on their perceptions of current inflation, especially at a time when inflation has fallen back sharply from a peak of 5.2% in late 2008. We discuss this in more detail below. Column 4  tests for whether the differences observed between the coefficients in columns  2 and 3 are significant by including a set of interaction terms between the control  variables and the February 2009 dummy. Experiments were done with interactions with other variables that were always insignificant and hence were omitted. The evidence is that mortgage holders, men and the more educated have significantly lower expectations in February 2009 than previously. Column 5 now adds the perceptions of inflation over the preceding twelve month period. Interestingly 49% of individuals gave  exactly the same response  to the question on perceptions  as they did on their expectations on average over 2001-2009. This fell to 32% in February 2009. It is not surprising then that perceptions of past inflation are a major determinant of perceptions. However, even when controlling for inflation perceptions the impact of gender, age, education  and employment and housing status identified in previous regressions are robust. Furthermore, the interaction terms for the February 2009 survey remain significant. This suggests that these groups lowered their expectations more quickly than other groups, perhaps because their expectations are less backward-looking. We investigate this hypothesis further by conducting similar regressions, where we restrict the observations to each  category  of  educational attainment. Table 4 illustrates that perceptions of current inflation have less of an influence on inflation expectations than for those with higher education. The coefficients in column 1 for inflation perceptions are significantly smaller than those in column 3  when the  same regression is conducted on those with the highest educational attainment. Of course, using inflation perceptions as a rule of thumb in forming inflation expectations may be more rational when inflation is close to target, and there is confidence in the monetary authority to maintain inflation close to that target. However, over the recent past inflation has been volatile. So when inflation exceeds the target such a rule of thumb may be less successful in accurately forming inflation expectations. Columns 4-6 illustrate that over the recent past inflation expectations have had a much smaller influence on the inflation expectations of the most educated. Indeed, for this group inflation perceptions are not significant, or have only a marginal significance. This could suggest that those with higher educational attainment are less likely to be backward-looking in   the formation of their inflation expectations. Chart 9 helps illustrate this behavior by plotting median inflation expectations by educational attainment. In the very  latest  survey,  February 2009, median inflation expectations for those with the highest educational attainment were 1.3pp ###newline###  Micro data on inflation expectations in the UK are also available from a further data source. The GfK/NOP Consumer Confidence Barometer (CCB) survey collects nationally representative data for those aged 16+ from a random sample of telephone owning households. Sample sizes are approximately 2000 per month. These data are collected monthly across each member state of the European Union, and for the UK are available since 1985.9 We have only obtained access to the micro-data since 1996. The distribution of the responses is reported in Table 5. It is evident that non-responses  are much lower than in the Bank of England Inflation Attitudes survey, on average 5% report Males believe that prices will rise more slowly than females as do the more highly educated compared to the less highly educated.  This contrasts with the evidence from the Bank   of England Inflation Attitudes Survey where males expect higher rates of increase. Consistent  with the findings from the Inflation Attitudes survey, expectations are higher among older age groups, females and the least educated. We also find that expectations are higher among non- workers and in London. As in the Inflation Attitudes Survey individuals  perceptions of inflation are a highly significant determinant of their expectations (column 2). ###newline###  The success of an inflation targeting regime is grounded in the credibility of the central bank, and the ability of the central bank to educate those whose expectations in turn impact monetary policy.   The Bank of England Inflation Attitudes survey includes a question intended   to capture confidence amongst the general public in the monetary authority to control inflation:  how satisfied are you with how the Bank of England is doing its job to set interest rates to  control inflation?  Responses ranged from very dissatisfied; dissatisfied; neither; satisfied and very satisfied plus  no idea . Of course, the risk of analyzing survey responses to this question is that they may be confused by other factors such as the impact of monetary policy on changes on Column 1 of Table 8 suggests that satisfaction with the Bank of England is lower among women, those in rented accommodation, the least educated and the young. Satisfaction rises with age. These results are stable across the various specifications. Interestingly, satisfaction with how the Bank is doing its job rises linearly with age, being highest with those aged 65 and over. Satisfaction is higher among home owners and lower among renters. The time dummies suggest growing dissatisfaction with the Bank's performance over time. With the exception of age, it appears that those groups who expect lower inflation, even after taking account of their inflation perceptions, such as home owners and the more educated are also those groups that are more likely to believe the Bank of England is able to control inflation. How do we interpret the recent deterioration in satisfaction with the Bank of England?  The interaction terms indicate that satisfaction has fallen across all age groups, education is not significant and that mortgage holders are less dissatisfied with the Bank. This could be because  the recent responses reflect broader macroeconomic developments such as the credit crisis and falling mortgage interest payments rather than a lack of confidence in the Bank to meet the inflation target. ###newline###  In Table 10 we examine the probability that an individual in the Bank of England survey  correctly  forecasts what inflation will be twelve months ahead. We do this using the February ###newline###  What are the conclusions from our findings? First, there is evidence that significant numbers of individuals do not know what the inflation rate is, how it has changed and are unable to predict how it might change in the future. This is consistent with recent evidence from the United States suggesting very low levels of financial literacy. Second, there are high non-  response rates to those surveys on how satisfied respondents are with the Bank of England in its role in controlling inflation. Non-responses are especially high among the  least  educated, females, the poorest individuals and the young. So at least for some groups their inflation expectations, either implicit or explicit, are unlikely to be anchored to the inflation target. We find that age, gender, income, housing status and education are important characteristics in forming inflation expectations12. The more highly educated and those  with higher incomes are more optimistic about the path of prices, believing they will rise at a slower pace than younger, less educated and less affluent individuals. We find that price expectations are backward-looking. Perceptions of current inflation are highly significant determinant of inflation expectations. However, perceptions of inflation are a less important consideration for the more highly educated. Similarly, the most educated are more likely to be satisfied that the Bank of England in its role in controlling inflation. This could help explain both their lower inflation expectations and why perceptions of inflation  are  less  important in determining their inflation expectations. These results are similar to those of Pfajfar and Santoro (2008) with respect to demographic factors that influence inflation expectations as measured by the University of Michigan survey for the U.S who found that males, the more highly educated and those with higher incomes are more likely to accurately report the current level of, and predict inflation. The main explanations for heterogeneity in the formation of inflation expectations that have been proposed in the literature are that agents rely on different models, may have different information sets, or have different capacities for processing information. The results presented in this paper regarding the more highly educated provide some justification for this approach. First, perceptions of current inflation are less important for this group in their forecasts for inflation in the future. Second, intuitively we would expect this group can employ  more  sophisticated  models in forming their expectations, and may have a greater capacity to process information. Hence, this paper provides empirical support for models of heterogeneity  in  inflation expectations formation. ###newline###  Table 7: Distribution of Responses to Q. 14  Overall, how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the way the Bank of England is doing its job to set interest rates in order to control inflation? : Table 9. Probability of correctly reporting the level/changes in the official inflation rate, 2005/2006 (dprobits). Table 10. Probability of correctly reporting the inflation rate 12 months ahead, February, 2005-2008 (dprobits) Notes: excluded age <25; own outright: GCSE, Feb05. CPI in February 2006 2.0%;  February 2007 2.8%, February 2008 2.5% and February   2009 3.2%.   RPI in February ###newline###  Gurkaynak, R., Sack, B., Swanson, E. (2003), The excess sensitivity of long term interest rates: evidence and implications for macroeconomic models. Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Working Paper 50.