 I am grateful to Alina Barnett, David Barkshire and Lukasz Rachel for assistance in preparing this speech, and also to other colleagues for helpful comments. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. We are often told we live in an era of unprecedented globalisation. But the UK has always been an open economy. The share of traded goods and services in GDP, at around %, is no higher today than it was  years ago (Chart ). Chart , taken from Obstfeld and Taylor (), is a stylised representation of the degree of openness in global capital markets. It has a similar U-shaped pattern: the globalisation of the past fifty years has served mostly to recover ground lost during the first half of the last century. Despite this long history, it seems to me that the public discourse about our economy tends to focus disproportionately on domestic considerations, domestic policy in particular. These are correlated, economists have found, with underlying features of national economies   the integrity of contracts and property rights, for example, or the extent and quality of education   that, while not policy choices in the conventional sense, are nonetheless amenable to change. Clearly, therefore, we are far from powerless to determine our economic fortunes. However, there s still a risk that, even after the experience of a financial crisis that was so clearly global in nature, we under-appreciate the consequences of living in a global economy. This morning I want to make of couple of points in this regard, one about the short run   the cyclical horizon over which shifts in demand matter more for output   the other about productivity and our economic performance over the longer run. In doing so I cannot possibly claim to do any sort of justice to the vast literature in this area   it s called open economy macroeconomics   and these points are as much about simple statistics as they are about economics. But they may still be worth bearing in mind. ###newline###  The first point is that, over the cycle, the contribution of trade to aggregate demand is a poor measure of the influence of global shocks on the UK economy. This is important because, at least in the simpler approaches to forecasting, variations in net trade seem to be the only way the rest of the world gets a look in. Short-run movements in output are assumed to be determined entirely by shifts in aggregate demand; domestic spending   consumption plus investment plus government spending   is in turn assumed to depend only on home-grown things (including domestic policy); to the extent it matters at all, the rest of the world influences domestic output growth purely via its demand for UK exports. But this can t be right because, in general, domestic demand here is strongly correlated with that in the rest of the world: Chart  depicts their annual growth rates since . Because our economy is relatively small, this co-movement can only arise from the influence on our economy of shocks from elsewhere   or, at least, common to the UK and the rest of the world   not from things that originate at home. Chart  plots a rolling estimate of the same correlation going back to the late th century. Note that the opening (or rather the re-opening) of international trade and capital flows during the second half of the last century saw the degree of co-movement go up. If the rebirth of globalisation has increased the coherence of national cycles, it s done so by affecting all areas of spending, not just export demand. Why might this be? Clearly, there are such things as global economic shocks. World wars, big political events, shifts in the supply of oil   these are all things that can affect domestic spending in many countries in a similar fashion. At least among developed countries, the same goes for bouts of technological progress, a topic I ll return to below. But there s no evidence the importance of these things has increased over time: if anything, the opposite is true. A more likely explanation of the trend in Chart  is the rising degree of openness in global capital markets identified in Chart . As it s become more integrated, the international financial system has become better at sharing, and distributing, economic shocks, thereby increasing the degree of co-ordination between economies, their domestic demand included. You can see both good and bad in this. The good is that country-specific risks get shared. By selling development rights to foreign companies, for example, a commodity-rich nation can spread some of the underlying revenue risk to shareholders of those companies. Pharmaceutical firms concentrate research projects with uncertain outcomes in particular countries, including this one, but raise money from across the world. The fact that a mortgage provider in California can sell default risk to an investor in London or Frankfurt is, at least in principle, a good thing. By diversifying country-specific risks in this way, the international financial system reduces their impact on national economies. As that system expands, you d therefore expect precisely the rising degree of cyclical co-ordination evident in Chart . As that last example illustrates, however, the potential bad is that the international financial system doesn t just spread risk but creates and amplifies it too. The rapid expansion in the market for US mortgage-backed securities may have diversified exposure to default but, by increasing the distance between the ultimate borrowers and lenders   informationally as well as geographically   it also seemed to increase the risk of it. In many instances, the final owner of US mortgage debt was both over-leveraged and ill-informed about the quality of the underlying asset. As I explained in a speech a couple of years ago, the significant majority of UK banks  losses were made on their (very large) overseas balance sheets, not on their domestic lending. In the case of mortgages, for example, British banks lost   on their exposure to non-UK loans for every   lost at home. Even in normal times, you can find plenty of evidence that financial conditions in the UK are susceptible to global developments. Take Chart . It plots the average response of -year and -year sterling interest rates to surprises in economic data. As you d expect, news about UK GDP has a significant effect on interest rates at the front end of the curve. But similar (one-standard-deviation) surprises in US employment, which has no direct bearing on UK monetary policy, have almost as big an impact on -year rates and a much bigger impact at the long end of the sterling curve than any indicator of UK economic activity, including our own employment release. More generally, risk and term premia in equity and bond markets are much more tightly correlated across countries than the  fundamentals  would lead one to expect. In a well-publicised paper last year, the economist Helene Rey said these swings in risk sentiment had led to a  global credit cycle  that, for many countries, had little to do with their own economic conditions and was therefore destabilising. The cycle was instead, she said, driven disproportionately by developments in  the centre country  (the United States). Whatever their origin, it s easy to see how such shifts in risk sentiment could induce co-movements in national cycles. Because they add rather than subtract risk, these swings in risk sentiment would clearly be a less benign source of correlation than the diversification effects discussed above. The Rey paper has frequently been cited by emerging-market policymakers worried about the impact that the slowing rate of asset purchases by the US Fed   so-called  tapering    has had on their own borrowing costs. But it s easy to exaggerate this channel. It s not as if the US is the only source of risk in the world   in the past - years, the problems in continental Europe have surely been more important, both globally and for UK markets specifically (Chart  plots the rolling correlation between daily moves in UK equity yields and the spread between periphery and core-country sovereign bond yields in the euro area). The idea that the international financial system has done nothing but add risk   whatever its origin   is also at odds with the longer-term data. If that were true then, as that system grew, one would presumably have expected national economies to have become progressively more volatile over time. Yet, even allowing for the effects of the financial crisis, the variance of UK GDP growth over the past  years isn t much higher than over any other -year period in our history; there s certainly no upward trend in the series (Chart ). In any event, my main intention in this section is not to persuade you that global banks and capital markets are an unqualified  good  or  bad  thing, simply that they increase the inter-dependence of our economies. Together with the existence of economic disturbances that are truly global, an integrated financial system means the impact of world on the UK economy goes far beyond its demand for our exports. I ll end this section by presenting a simple estimate of the true  global component  of UK growth. Derived by Bank economists, the blue swathe in Chart  is what you get (more or less) when you project UK growth on a range of world variables, financial as well as real. There are clearly times when international factors do not explain what s happened in the UK. Though it was similar to that in the United States, for example, our own cycle of the late s and early s was completely out of synch with that in continental Europe. Driven by German re-unification, domestic demand in what is now the euro area began to accelerate at exactly the time the UK was entering recession; the aftermath of the re-unification boom, during which European growth then slowed, coincided with the post-EMU recovery in this country. In general, however, the blue swathe explains much more of UK growth than simple variations in trade volumes. ###newline###  This tells us something about the relationship between UK and global growth over the cycle. I now want to say something about the comparative behaviour of the UK economy over the longer run, at horizons over which activity depends more on supply, and trends in productivity, than on demand. That post-war period marked the high point for the gap between the two countries. Right up until the late s, productivity in the UK was only around % of US levels. It then started to improve, steadily I don t want to imply this has happened specifically because of the contraction in international capital flows since the crisis nor, more generally, should one overdo the importance of openness for domestic productivity. But it is striking that the shape of the line in Chart  has the same U-shape as the measures of globalisation I showed you at the start. The long decline in the UK s relative economic performance happened to coincide with the contraction in international trade and capital flows during the first half of the twentieth century. As these markets re-opened, the gap began to close again. Can this just be co-incidence? There are certainly reasons for believing it might be more than that. There is other evidence, across a much wider range of countries, and controlling for other influences on growth, that greater openness allows faster convergence towards the productivity frontier. There are also plausible reasons why this might be the case. Open capital markets allow countries to tap sources of finance other than their own saving. So to the extent productivity is low because an economy is under-capitalised, open markets should help. It s also possible that international investment   direct investment in particular   brings with it more intangible benefits, including the underlying knowledge and ideas that drive productivity performance. Several studies have found that multinational firms are more productive than their domestic counterparts. Others posit that, over time, these embodied skills often spread to purely domestic companies in the same sector. That experience serves as a salutary lesson for the UK and, in particular, the view expressed in the latest MPC minutes that because  the technological frontier was still advancing globally  there was scope for the United Kingdom to take advantage of that as a source of higher productivity . The decline in relative productivity in the euro area began several years before the financial crisis and there is no guarantee that our own productivity will again begin to converge to US levels, even as the international financial system returns to health. But I suspect that process   and, more generally, our openness to the rest of the world   is and will remain an important determinant of our long-run economic performance. ###newline###  Let me try and summarise these points. As we ve seen, our weather isn t the only thing we import from across the Atlantic. During the crisis British banks lost considerable sums on property-related loans in Ireland and the United States. This contributed significantly to their need to cut back on domestic lending and the subsequent economic downturn in the UK. Nor is it just the Atlantic from which the economic weather can come: as Chart  showed, the cost of equity in the UK has for some time been tightly correlated with risk sentiment in the euro area. Thanks to the deep integration of international banks and capital markets, problems that arise in one part of the world can rapidly arrive on our own shores. That may be why, as the system has become more integrated over time, economic cycles (including in domestic demand) have become more co-ordinated. ###newline###  I believe it would be a big mistake, however, to imagine that the system brings us only problems. For one thing, that integration allows the UK to diversify its own domestic risks too. Around % of UK-quoted securities are owned by foreign investors, who will have absorbed a similar proportion of losses on those assets during the crisis. As it happens, the UK s overseas assets have a relatively high proportion of equity and FDI and may therefore be slightly riskier than its collective overseas liabilities. But, to that extent, the average return on those assets is also likely to be higher. That s probably why, despite cumulative current account deficits of % of GDP over the past  years, the UK s net overseas asset position hasn t deteriorated (Chart ). Second, the cyclical influence of the rest of the world can just as easily be positive as negative. Over the last year or so, for example, I think that receding near-term risk in the euro area has been a significant contributor to our own economic recovery. I m not sure that s the accepted view. Taking our flat trade balance as evidence that the rest of the world has failed to contribute anything to the recovery, most commentators point to purely domestic factors   the Funding for Lending Scheme, for example, or the government s Help to Buy policy   as the primary cause of the recent acceleration in activity. The first of these was followed by a sharp retracement in the funding costs of UK banks, during the second half of  (Chart ). Following that drop, through the course of , the supply of mortgage credit and housing-related economic activity both improved sharply. Finally, to return to the long run, I rather doubt that the UK would have enjoyed as rapid a convergence in productivity, towards US levels, had it not been for re-opening of international capital markets during the latter part of the last century. The inter-connectedness of global banking and capital markets probably contributed to the severity of the financial crisis. Since then, for one reason or another, UK productivity has stagnated and the earlier process of productivity convergence has gone into reverse. There s no inevitability that we recover that lost ground: even when international capital is mobile, productivity can diverge as well as converge to the frontier. On balance, however, we are surely likely to benefit from our exposure to the world.