 I would like to thank Rodrigo Guimar es, Yad Selvakumar, Manveer Sokhi, Ali Schomberg, Mike Joyce, Michael Saunders, Silvana Tenreyro, Michael McLeay, Clare Macallan for help with data and comments. There is a great deal of interest among economic commentators, in the UK and elsewhere, in the yield curve. What should a  normal  yield curve look like? What does the current shape of the yield curve mean for the economy? What has QE done to the yield curve? What will an unwind of QE do to the yield curve? These are some of the questions I will address today. I have discussed yield curves before.1 My motivation for bringing up the topic again is that the MPC has given updated guidance this year on the QE unwind. Moreover, the Fed is now in the process of unwinding QE. ECB is winding down its QE purchases, and the BoJ is revising its QE implementation. In this speech I discuss what, in theory, should drive the shape of the yield curve. I use a very long run of historical data to provide some empirical evidence to support the theory and explain where we are today. In light of this, I then revisit the arguments and evidence about how QE has influenced the yield curve. Finally, I discuss what lessons central banks can learn from the early stages of QE unwind in the US. This is a rather long speech, so I will give you a really short version up front. The yield curve was upward-sloping, on average, in the 20th century. Holders of long-term bonds required higher returns, on average, than holders of short-term bonds. But the yield curve was flat before that, in the gold standard era. I argue that, since Bank of England independence, the fundamentals of inflation and inflation risk have become more similar to the gold standard era than to the 20th century average, and in particular are very different from the 1970s and 1980s. So we should expect yield curves to be flat again, on average. I argue that all of these changes in fundamentals and term premium were largely in place before QE started, so we do not need to resort to QE as a separate factor to explain the current shape of yield curves. Does QE not affect the yield curve? Of course it does. But it does so primarily by affecting expectations of future monetary policy, revealing the central bank s reaction function. This anchors inflation expectations even when interest rates are constrained at the effective lower bound, which in turn affects a wide range of asset prices, economic growth and inflation. In that sense, QE is not that different from conventional monetary policy. I argue against the view that QE works primarily by pushing down long-term interest rates directly, through compressing the term premium (the  portfolio balance channel ). Understanding the main channels through which QE works is going to be very important when it comes to unwinding QE: my view that QE works primarily via expectations, with additional powerful liquidity effects that are temporary and mainly relevant during periods of market stress, implies that unwinding QE need not have a material impact on the shape of the yield curve, or indeed on the economy, if properly communicated and done gradually. ###newline###  Anyone that has applied for a mortgage, or a loan more generally, will have first-hand experience of how interest rate are different for different horizons, or maturities. The yield curve is a simple graph of interest rates at different maturities. When commentators say the yield curve is  flat , they tend to mean that long-term interest rates are at similar levels to short-term interest rates. A  steep  curve is one where long-term interest rates are quite a bit higher than short-term interest rates. And, for completeness, an  inverted  yield curve is one where long-term interest rates are lower than short-term interest rates. The difference, or spread, between long-term interest rates and short-term interest rates is commonly referred to as the yield spread or term spread. There is no precise convention about what constitutes long term vs short-term, but usually long term means 10 years or more, and short term means 3 years or less. Many different financial instruments have a yield curve: mortgages, government bonds, corporate bonds, interest rates swaps, credit default swaps. I will generally refer to interest rates on government bonds. Interest rates on government bonds can be usefully decomposed into real and nominal rates, and into an expectations component and a risk premium component, often referred to as the term premium.2 The diagram below illustrates this decomposition. The decomposition can be done for each maturity. It can also be done for average rates (spot rates) or rates that apply to a future short term period (forward rates). ###newline###  So long-term rates can be higher than short-term rates because expected future real rates are higher than current real rates, or expected future inflation is higher than current inflation, or because investors demand a high real term premium, or because investors demand a high inflation risk premium. I will now discuss what drives each of these components in turn. The expectations component of the yield curve, ie the extent to which future real rates are expected to be above or below current real rates, is closely linked to the economic cycle. In a downturn, the central bank cuts short-term interest rates to low levels, but after some years the interest rate is expected to revert back to a higher level, that will be appropriate when the inflation is at target, there is no slack in the economy and growth has returned to trend.3 Conversely, during an economic boom, when growth is above potential but there is little slack and inflation pressures are building, the central bank might raise short-term rates to levels above those expected to prevail further out. In simple terms, a weak economy will therefore have a steep yield curve, and a strong economy will have a flat or even inverted yield curve, simply due to the expected future path of interest rates. Next, I turn to the risk premium, or term premium, component of the yield curve. Finance theory tells us that the risk premium that any investor demands on an asset is related to how the returns on that asset vary with consumption.4 Intuitively, investors like assets that have high returns when consumption is low, i.e. high returns when economic activity is depressed. So investors will accept a low or negative risk premium on such assets. Such assets have insurance-like properties: they pay out more in bad times, when investors need it most. Investors dislike assets that have low returns when economic activity is depressed, and will therefore demand a high risk premium on such assets. So the key driver of risk premia is the covariance of asset returns with consumption growth, which simply means the extent to which an asset has insurance-like properties. In the case of government bonds, long-term expected returns depend on future short-term real interest rates, as well as future inflation. So the risk premium will depend on how both of these are expected to vary with future consumption. The insurance benefit of long term bonds as compared to short term bonds depend on how persistent consumption growth is. Short-term real interest rates tend to fall when the economy is weak, pushing the price of real bonds up. If consumption growth is persistent, i.e. if weak current consumption growth tends to be followed by weak subsequent consumption growth as well, then risk-free real rates will tend to be persistently low as well. If that is the case, the return on real long-term bonds will rise by more than the return on real short-term bonds during a period of low consumption growth. Real long-term bonds therefore provide, other things equal, more insurance value than real short-term bonds if consumption growth is persistent. The more persistent consumption growth is, the more negative the real term premium will be.5 In other words, long-term real bond returns should, on average over the cycle, be lower than short-term real bond returns when consumption is persistent.6 Next, let us think about the inflation risk premium. Investors need to be compensated for the risk that future inflation turns out differently from today s expected inflation. Again, the covariance point is key: investors will demand an inflation risk premium if inflation surprises on the upside (eroding the real returns on nominal bonds) precisely at the time when consumption growth is weak. And the inflation risk premium will be higher if inflation is persistent, i.e. if inflation drifts away from its previously expected level for a long time. If, instead, inflation surprises on the downside when consumption growth is weak, the inflation risk premium should be negative. So the two key variables that determine the size of the inflation risk premium are the covariance of inflation with consumption growth and the persistence of inflation itself. Negative covariance and high inflation persistence hurt investors most, therefore requiring the highest inflation risk premium. ###newline###  I now turn to long run data on consumption, inflation, short-term and long-term rates7 to see to what extent the theory is supported by the data. The benefit of looking at a long sample is that there is more variation of the separate theoretical drivers, allowing a cleaner test of the theory.8 The bottom line from the evidence I review below is that the theory works very well in practice. In particular, the periods of increasing and persistent inflation, with negative covariance with consumption growth, such as the late 1970s and early 1980s, were the periods of highest term premium. Periods with stable inflation, and with positive covariance with consumption, as we experienced in the last two decades, as well as the gold standard era, were periods of low or negative term premium. A first cut of the data is to compare the UK term spread between two long samples that had on average very different values of persistence and covariance, namely the gold standard era, and the post-gold standard era (after 1931).9 I then look at the variation over time in more detail within the past century. ###newline###  As shown in Table 1, during the gold standard, the term spread was, on average, slightly negative at -20bp. In the more recent period, the term spread averaged around 120bp. So the sum of real and inflation risk premia was significantly higher in the more recent period compared with the gold standard. How does this compare with the theoretical drivers of the term premium, namely the persistence of consumption and inflation, and their covariance? During the gold standard, consumption growth showed little persistence, as did inflation, and inflation was on average zero. When neither consumption nor inflation are persistent, the risk premium on long-term bonds should be around zero, as indeed it was in the data. After an inflation surprise, inflation is not expected to drift, i.e. it is expected to return to its previous rate, so long-term nominal bonds are not subject to higher inflation risk than short-term nominal bonds. And with little consumption persistence, long-term real bonds do not provide much additional insurance relative to short-term real bonds, because consumption growth and therefore short-term rates are expected to return to their averages relative quickly. But in the more recent period starting in 1931, inflation and consumption became more persistent, and inflation rates trended up. The autocorrelation of inflation, a measure of persistence, rose from around 0.1 to around 0.8. Moreover, consumption growth and inflation became negatively correlated with each other, so periods of high inflation were also periods of low consumption growth, on average. So inflation tended to hurt investors precisely when the economy was depressed, and the inflation pain tended to be persistent. That made long-term nominal bonds far riskier than short-term nominal bonds, and investors demanded higher average returns to compensate for that risk: the average term spread rose to 120bp from slightly negative. 10 So far, we have just looked at the post 1930s period as a single period. But in fact, there were substantial variations in the monetary regime within that period, notably joining the Bretton Woods exchange rate regime in 1946 (followed by periodic devaluations), breaking up of Bretton Woods in 1971, the start of inflation targeting in 1992, and the resumption of operational independence of the Bank of England and the creation of the Monetary Policy Committee in 1997. Benati (2008) has documented that the persistence of inflation was influenced by these different monetary regimes. Persistence rose somewhat after the gold standard was abandoned in 1931, but rose much more sharply when Bretton Woods effectively ended in 1971. With no clear nominal anchor for UK monetary policy, inflation drifted very far from any notion of price stability in the 1970s and 1980s. Only when inflation targeting was adopted in 1992 did inflation re-anchor. To assess the implications of these changes for the term premium, we also need to examine what happened to the covariance between inflation and consumption growth within the post-1930s era. Figure 1 and 2 shows the time-varying long run mean and persistence of inflation estimated for England since the 1300s, to show just how unique the persistent drift up in inflation in the 1970s was. This analysis highlights yet again that the 1970s-1980s were unusual in the big sweep of history.11 These were times when nominal bonds were unusually risky. Not only was inflation persistent and with a rising trend, but it had the most negative covariance with consumption growth in its history, meaning that inflation tended to hurt investors most when consumption was already low. Negative supply shocks had persistent effects on inflation, as the nominal anchor for monetary policy was weak or absent. Figure 3 shows simple rolling estimates of the correlation between inflation and consumption growth. It shows the correlation steadily declined in the post 1930s, becoming more negative. It was only in recent decades that it became positive again, resembling the correlation that prevailed during the gold standard. With trend inflation low and stable after inflation-targeting and independence, and inflation correlation with consumption positive again, one would expect long-term bonds to have a term premium that is close to zero or negative, after a period of a strongly positive inflation risk premium in the 1970s and 1980s. That is exactly what we find in the data. Figure 4 shows estimates from term structure models that incorporate the information in surveys of professional forecasters about expectations.12 The term premium on 10y government bonds is estimated to have been positive for the 1972-1996 period, before falling to slightly negative after Bank of England independence in 1997. Moreover, today s levels are not that different from the pre-crisis 1997-2007 average. (See Table A1 in the appendix). The fact that we are able to understand the decline in term premium since the 1980s using only the deep fundamentals of inflation persistence and inflation correlation with consumption means that we do not need to appeal to extraordinary circumstances or the impact of unconventional monetary policy as an explanation. I will return to that in sections 3 and 4.13 I am not making a forecast that the term premium will never rise again. First, the term premium moves around over the cycle, just like risk premia on other assets. I am only making a point about where we should expect it to be on average now. Second, I am arguing that we would need to see a change in the inflation risk fundamentals to see a large and sustained increase in the term premium. That in turn will depend on both the shocks hitting the economy, and how the MPC responds to those shocks. But even before the financial crisis and ensuing period of QE and policy rates at their effective lower bound, the term premium was roughly where it is now in the UK, so just a return to pre-crisis normal would not mean a significantly higher term premium than where we are today15. As I have mentioned before,16 the decline in long-term yields relative to the pre-crisis period that can be attributed to the term premium is measured in tens of basis points, not hundreds of basis points. ###newline###  Before turning to the specifics of QE and the yield curve, I want to recap more broadly how I think QE works as an instrument of monetary policy. It is important to emphasise that, conceptually, QE is not that different from conventional monetary policy. Conventional monetary policy and QE both involve open market operations: purchases and repos of government bonds and other financial instruments, in exchange for central bank reserves. The difference is only in emphasis and scale: conventional monetary supplies the necessary reserves to achieve a particular level of a very short-term interest rate (in the case of the UK, the target of conventional policy was the SONIA rate that prevails from one MPC policy decision to the next one).17 But the wider objective of policy is that such changes in very short-term money market interest rates affect a wide range of other interest rates and other asset prices, which in turn affect growth and inflation. QE policy also supplies reserves, but de-emphasises the impact on the very short-term money market rate18, which is typically at its effective lower bound when QE is deployed. Like conventional policy, QE policy also aims to affect a wide range of interest rates and other asset prices, which in turn affect growth and inflation. Both conventional policy and QE policy are deployed with the aim of keeping inflation close to target. It has long been understood19 that the key mechanism by which conventional policy affects the economy is not the direct effect on the economy of very short term money market rates, which is small. Rather, changes in policy rates affect not just current money market rates, but also expectations of future money market rates, which in turn affect mortgage rates, corporate bond rates and a whole range of asset prices that are important for the economy. If market participants thought that a change in the policy rate today was going to be reversed next month, today s change would have very little impact. The powerful impact from monetary policy is that today s action influences expectations of future actions, because policy rate changes and the accompanying communication reveal the central bank s reaction function. There is a close parallel with QE: today s purchases of government bonds send a clear signal that the central bank deems adding more stimulus is necessary, with the size and pace revealing the amount of stimulus, even though the policy rate is at or near its effective lower bound. That influences expectations of future monetary policy, as QE is a powerful signal that a central bank is not minded to raise rates any time soon, since it just voted to add even more stimulus. I prefer calling this an  expectations channel  rather than a  signalling channel  because the signalling channel is usually interpreted more narrowly as just providing information about the future path of rates. By  expectations channel  I have in mind a broader mechanism that informs people about the future path of interest rates, but also about the reaction function: how the central bank responds to news, conditions under which further QE might be deployed, tolerance for temporary above-target inflation when the output gap is large.20 Just like with conventional policy, both the actions and the communication are important in determining the impact on the economy and asset prices. It is important to note that my assessment that both conventional policy and QE work largely via expectations does not mean they have no effect on term premia or risk premia of other assets. There is a large body of evidence that conventional policy affects all kinds of asset prices: long term bonds, credit spreads, equity prices, and exchange rates.21 Monetary policy changes the outlook for the economy and the balance of risks, so there is every reason to think it should also have an impact on risk premia. And QE can be expected to have similar effects, even if both conventional and QE policy work primarily via expectations. If this description of conventional monetary policy sounds unfamiliar it is because textbook macro models tend to ignore risk premia, which finance theory tells us are crucial to understand any asset price. One argument that some are tempted to make, but I want to dismiss, is the following: if QE policy is all about influencing expectations, why not just stick to forward guidance? Forward guidance merits a place in the monetary policy toolbox, but there are two reasons why QE and forward guidance are not perfect substitutes. Unlike forward guidance, QE does have important direct effects, even if they are less well understood than in the case of conventional policy. First, purchasing a large quantity of any asset in a short space of time pushes up the price, even if only temporarily. Second, QE improves aggregate liquidity by increasing reserves at a time when aggregate liquidity is scarce. Third, QE can target specific assets for which buyers are scarce.22 Once orderly market function has been restored, these liquidity effects fade away, but they are crucial at a time of financial stress23. Finally, the demonstrated commitment to avoiding deflation by adding to the money supply may also help anchor inflation expectations. A second reason why QE and forward guidance are different is that the impact on expectations from QE comes from taking a policy action today, not just talking about policy action in the future. To see this more clearly, imagine arguing, in normal times, that we can set policy by talking about future interest changes, while keeping current interest rates always unchanged. Everyone would see through that pretty quickly: if talk about future changes is never accompanied by current changes, it will soon cease to have an effect. The absence of policy action, in the case of pure forward guidance that is not accompanied by action validating the guidance, inevitably invites doubts about the future action irrespective of how it is communicated, rendering it less powerful than immediate action. Having set out how I believe QE works, let me now provide some evidence that it does work. One striking illustration of the impact of QE is given by the different experience in the early phases of QE in the UK and US on the one hand, and Japan on the other hand. Japan was the subject of much criticism by leading macroeconomists for not doing enough to avoid a deflationary trap in the 1990s and 2000s.24 Yet the path of nominal rates, both short-term and long-term, was incredibly similar in the early stages, as seen in Figures 5 and 7. These similar changes across the nominal yield curve took place despite the fact the US and UK resorted to asset purchases early on, while Japan only pursued similar policies more than a decade later, having raised policy rates briefly in the intervening period.25 The difference was the path of inflation, and more importantly, inflation expectations.26 While inflation expectations remained relatively anchored in the US and UK, they drifted lower in Japan early on, and remained stuck at low levels (Figure 6).27 The absence of more decisive action caused doubt about the BoJ s commitment to fighting disinflation, and as a result, inflation expectations drifted lower. This meant that, for similar nominal rates, real rates were much higher in Japan, i.e. policy was less stimulative, entrenching the low inflation expectations. Eventually, lower inflation expectations brought down nominal yields in Japan by even more than in the US and UK, despite the fact that Japan did not buy long-term government bonds over the period shown in the chart. A similar picture emerges in the Eurozone following the interest rate hikes in 2011 and the absence of QE in the initial phases of the downturn. As shown in Figure 8, inflation expectations began to drift lower from 2014 onward. It was only when the ECB committed to QE that inflation expectations started to recover, allowing real rates to fall lower and therefore be more stimulative, which in turn reinforced the drift up of inflation expectations back towards target. I have argued that QE works mainly by influencing expectations of future monetary policy, underpinned by the strong signal that immediate policy action sends about the central bank s reaction function and its assessment of the economy, as well as by strong liquidity effects during times of financial stress. with myopic arbitrageurs to examine the role of the quantity supplied of particular bonds28. Applied to QE, the theory says that, by buying large quantities of government bonds, the central bank bids up the price of government bonds by compressing their term premia, which reduces long-term interest rates. In turn, the reduction in long-term interest rates via lower term premia pushes up other asset prices and stimulates economic activity. Everything else equal, the preferred habitat theory implies a permanent decrease in the real term premium following a permanent reduction in net supply. Much of the literature29 on the effects of QE that uses the portfolio balance framework finds evidence that is consistent with such a framework, but, as is often the case in economics, also permits other interpretations. Moreover, some patterns in the data are plainly inconsistent with the framework, and I will highlight four.30 My view is that, thinking about QE as working through expectations and temporary liquidity effects instead, runs into fewer inconsistencies with the data, but of course, that does not constitute definitive proof in favour of my own view. Significant uncertainty remains about the precise channels through which QE works. Second, the portfolio balance channel relies on a direct effect of the net quantity of bonds that the private sector needs to absorb. By reducing that quantity, the central bank is supposed to reduce risk premia. But the quantity of government bonds that the private sector needed to absorb after accounting for the  purchases by central banks (shown in Figure 10) went up drastically during the crisis and stayed high, as the increased bond supply required to finance deficits far outstripped central bank purchases.34 So one could argue that the portfolio balance channel prevented risk premia from going up even more, but it cannot logically be an explanation for the general decline in yields since QE started. Moreover, the magnitude of the rise in net supply of government bonds in the early part of the crisis, and the contemporaneous rise in term premium during that period (between 2008 and 2010) suggests a small and temporary quantity effect, rather than a large and permanent one: supply has stayed high while the term premium completely unwound the rise in the 2008-2010 period.35 Third, much of the evidence of the direct impact of QE on yields comes from short window event studies: analysing the change in yields around the time when the central bank made official QE announcements or took QE actions. These event studies allow us to abstract from all the other economic and financial events that generally tend to move yields, and isolate the impact of QE. But, as I and many others36 have pointed out, the announcement effects are still subject to possible biases. The method could underestimate the impact of QE, if financial markets partially anticipate the announcement, or if it takes time for the market to digest the announcement. Conversely, the method could overestimate the impact of QE, if QE has temporary liquidity effects that die out quickly.37 Greenwood, Hanson and Liao (2018) extend the Vayanos and Vila (2009) and Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) models to a world with two markets and slow-moving capital between them. Their model implies that event studies are not able to identify the real effects of shocks to quantities in one market, as the market initially affected will overreact in the short term. To analyse the reliability of event studies, I re-run this type of analysis, but show in Figure 11 the response of yields not just on the day of the announcement, but in the 30-day subsequent window.38 There is a clear pattern here that shows that much of the effect tends to die out very quickly, which is why it is impossible to spot any effect from QE in the time series of long forwards shown in Figure 9. This is not definitive proof of anything, but it is much more consistent with a short-lived liquidity effect than with a persistent portfolio balance effect.39 In contrast, the  lying down  pattern of the yield curve, reflecting a change in expectations, happened slowly and persisted.40 Fourth, studies that use data on investor positions and broad wealth to investigate these quantity channels along with other channels (including expectations), tend to find very small effects.41 A recent Eurozone study by Koijen et al (2018) uses the most comprehensive and detailed information on the asset holdings of individual investors to examine the effects of QE in the Eurozone. They find that (1) the impact on government bond yields directly attributable to QE in the first 22 months of the ECB purchase programme is small, at only 13bp; (2) they find no evidence at all that domestic inelastic investors tend to switch to riskier assets after they sell their bonds to the central bank. One way to reconcile the permanent quantity effects, as implied by much of the QE empirical literature stressing preferred habitats and portfolio rebalance, with the temporary liquidity effects that I stress instead, is to extend the notion of slow moving capital in the two market model of Greenwood et al (2018) more generally, along the lines discussed in Duffie (2010). The idea of the slow moving capital literature is that arbitrageurs need time to raise capital, or might be temporarily constrained, which means large quantity changes can have large price effects until new capital flows in to the affected market. This is a more general way of capturing liquidity effects (meaning temporary price effects of large trades) economists have long known to exist. Figure 12 shows a popular measure of bond market illiquidity for the UK and US, highlighting how the late part of 2008 and early part of 2009 was an extremely extraordinary period of low liquidity. In the slow moving capital view, large quantity effects are mostly temporary, and larger when intermediaries are constrained, as in the financial crisis. But they have much smaller or no long run effects once intermediaries are unconstrained. Viewed from this perspective, QE effects would be larger in states of illiquidity, with little or no long run effects on term premium. In this sense it would not be different from conventional policy42 in preserving long run neutrality: its role is to speed up recovery, not to affect the end point or have any permanent real effects (e.g. on term premium).43 ###newline###  Let me recap briefly what we have learned so far. Low term premia are consistent with economic fundamentals, namely stable trend inflation and positive covariance between consumption and inflation. There is no need to appeal to a story of term premia being artificially compressed by QE to explain where we are today. QE policy works primarily via expectations of future monetary policy, with important liquidity effects which are temporary. Why is it so important to distinguish views about how QE affects the yield curve? Because it will inform how policy works when QE is unwound. A portfolio balance channel would be expected to work in a rather symmetric way: if the central bank compresses the term premium by a certain amount when buying assets, it would raise the term premium by a similar amount when selling assets. The economic impact should be symmetric as well. But a QE channel that works via expectations along with temporary liquidity effects is not symmetric on the way in and on the way out. Liquidity effects are far less important when markets functions well and its participants are well capitalised. This is consistent with the much smaller impact observed for the later rounds of QE relative to the initial announcements.44 And this would suggest that, as long as QE is unwound in a gradual and predictable way so as not to disrupt market functioning, liquidity effects on the way out should be negligible. This is precisely why the MPC has emphasised in its QE guidance that QE unwind will be  gradual and predictable  and  would take account of the need to maintain the orderly functioning of the gilt and corporate bond markets .45 The expectations channel of QE is not symmetric either. When policy rates are at the effective lower bound, the central bank is no longer able to use changes in the policy rates to affect expectations of future monetary policy. A key instrument is lost. So the main policy tool becomes QE, along with continuing communication, as the new policy lever to affect expectations. But when the policy rate moves away from the effective lower bound, the central bank now has two levers with which to affect expectations. To avoid sending conflicting signals in the future, the MPC has made it clear that, once Bank Rate is around 1.5%, Bank Rate will once again become  the primary instrument for monetary policy .46 This is important because it means that expectations of future policy rates can once again be influenced by changing current policy rates and continuing communication, exactly as was the case in pre-QE days. Provided this is well understood by households, businesses and financial markets, the unwind of QE should then have no additional effect on expectations, and therefore on the economy. Emphasising the expectations and liquidity channels of QE rather than the portfolio balance channel allows a better understanding of recent yield developments in the US. Recall that the Fed started raising its policy rate in late 2015, while leaving the QE portfolio in place. Over the course of 2017, it began to communicate that QE would start to be unwound in the near future, and in October 2017 the unwind process actually began. Over this period, the US yield curve flattened, and the term premium rose only slightly (Figure 13).47 Note that the QE unwind was even accompanied by significant news about increased government bond supply, given the fiscal easing currently taking place in the US. A portfolio balance story would have predicted large term premium effects. 48 While the term premium has been little changed, the yield curves in the US and UK have flattened significantly over the past few years. That has been largely driven by changing expectations of future interest rates, in response to changes in the economic outlook and actual policy rate changes. Figures 14 - 17 show the evolution of the yield curve slope against the evolution of the policy rate, for the UK and the US. It is entirely normal for the yield curve to flatten when the policy rate is rising, and for the yield curve to steepen when the policy rate is falling, as I discussed right at the beginning of this speech. Larger increases in short-term rates during a tightening cycle, with relatively more stable expected long-term rates, explain this pattern. As can be seen in the case of the US, the flattening in the yield curve in the current cycle, measured per unit of Federal Reserve conventional tightening, is quantitatively similar to the flattening that always tends to take place during tightening cycles. What has been crucial is the Fed s careful communication around the QE unwind steps, so that they do not inadvertently send a signal about future monetary policy that they do not wish to send. The MPC has already taken important steps in this direction with its November 2015 guidance and the update in June 2018, and further communication can be expected as we approach the date when QE unwind is likely to start. ###newline###  Understanding the main channels through which QE works is going to be very important when it comes to unwinding QE: my view that QE works primarily via expectations, with additional powerful liquidity effects that are temporary and mainly relevant during periods of market stress, implies that unwinding QE need not have a material impact on the shape of the yield curve, or indeed on the economy, if properly communicated and done gradually. ###newline###  "Monetary policy at low interest rates". Inflation report also mentioned that "a further easing in monetary policy was likely to be needed." to reduce the official Bank Rate paid on commercial bank reserves by 0.5 percentage points to 0.5%, and to undertake a programme of asset purchases of  75 billion financed by the issuance of central bank reserves." [...] "Committee agreed that the Bank should, in the first instance, finance  75 billion of asset purchases by the issuance of central bank reserves. [...] Part of that sum would finance the Bank of England s programme of private sector asset purchases through the Asset Purchase Facility, intended to improve the functioning of corporate credit markets. But in order to meet the Committee s objective of total purchases of  75 billion, the Bank would also buy medium- and long-maturity conventional gilts in the secondary market. It is likely that the majority of the overall purchases by value over the next three months will be of gilts. " purchases of government and corporate debt financed by the issuance of central bank reserves and to increase its size by  50 billion to a total of  125 billion." 06-Aug-09MPC statement"In the light of that outlook, the Committee also agreed that it should extend its programme of purchases of government and corporate debt to a total of  175 billion, financed by the issuance of central bank reserves." of purchases of government and corporate debt by  25 billion to a total of  200 billion, financed by the issuance of central bank reserves." purchase programme, financed by the issuance of central bank reserves, by  75 billion to a total of  275 billion." ###newline###  programme of asset purchases, financed by the issuance of central bank reserves, by  50 billion to a total of  325 billion." programme of asset purchases, financed by the issuance of central bank reserves, by  50 billion to a total of  375 billion." 04-Aug-16MPC statement This package comprises: a 25 basis point cut in Bank Rate to 0.25%; a new Term Funding Scheme to reinforce the pass- through of the cut in Bank Rate; the purchase of up to  10 billion of UK corporate bonds; and an expansion of the asset purchase scheme for UK government bonds of  60 billion, taking the total stock of these asset purchases to  435 billion.  ###newline###  under the program will be conducted with the Federal Reserve's primary dealers through a series of competitive auctions and will begin next week. Purchases of up to $500 billion in MBS will be conducted by asset managers selected via a competitive process with a goal of beginning these purchases before year-end. Purchases of both direct obligations and MBS are expected to take place over several quarters." approach might influence the yields on these securities, thus helping to spur aggregate demand. Indeed, last week the Fed announced plans to purchase up to $100 billion in GSE debt and up to $500 billion in GSE mortgage-backed securities over the next few quarters. It is encouraging that the announcement of that action was met by a fall in mortgage interest rates." Reserve s balance sheet further by purchasing up to an additional $750 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities, bringing its total purchases of these securities to up to $1.25 trillion this year, increase its purchases of agency debt this year by up to $100 billion to a total of up to $200 billion. Committee decided to purchase up to $300 billion of longer- term Treasury securities over the next six months." ###newline###  of securities at their current level by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-term Treasury securities. (Swapping of holdings of Agency debt into Treasury debt)" Note: Mean and standard deviation are calculated for each security between January 2005 and July 2007 Source: BoE calculations