 The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee. I would like to thank Oliver Ashtari Tafti and Michael McLeay for their help producing this speech. I would also like to thank Thomas Belsham, Ben Broadbent, Hamza Bilal Chaudhry, David Copple, Richard Harrison, Jonathan Haskel, Simon Kirby, Francesca Monti, Michael Saunders, Michal Stelmach and Jan Vlieghe for helpful comments and discussions. It is an honour to be here to give the Ronald Tress lecture. Ronald Tress pushed the frontier in economics by recognising the importance of data for the conduct of public policy. His vision was surely nurtured by his remarkably broad scholarship, as well as his years of experience in the War Cabinet, where he served from 1941 until 1947. He painstakingly worked on the construction of disaggregated labour and industry statistics. More than anyone, he would have recognised the critical role that technology could play in the process. Indeed, as Master of Birkbeck, one of his many legacies was to bring in the first electronic computer to the University of London. In the spirit of linking data and policy, today I will talk about inflation, the key element in our policy remit. And more specifically, I will focus on the disconnect in the data between the facts (what inflation has actually been) and what households perceived it   or expected it   to be. What is behind this disconnect and what should be done about it? Since the Bank of England s independence in 1997, CPI inflation has averaged 2%. (It was 2.0% in May 2019, the latest reading.) Households  perceptions and expectations of inflation have averaged well above our target, with huge dispersion across different demographic groups. Moreover, a significant fraction of people simply do not know what inflation is or might be   a pattern that appears to be particularly prevalent among households with lower income and education. Higher inflation expectations in principle reduce the incentive to save for the future, increasing current spending. It is less evident how not knowing what inflation is or might be affects individual behaviour. While bridging the gap between reality and expectations may not have a material macroeconomic impact, it could certainly improve the decision-making of uninformed households. The challenge is not just one for central bank communications as some of the differences in perceptions and expectations may relate to varying degrees of financial literacy. The Bank of England has made significant efforts to improve its communications and educational outreach. The MPC, for example, now publishes a visual summary of the Inflation Report, which aims to be accessible to a broad audience. The Bank has revamped its website and aims to speak in plain English as much as possible. And colleagues at the Bank have produced a set of lessons on the economy and how it relates to the individual, called econoME, which is part of a broader effort to raise economic and financial literacy. But there is certainly scope to do more, and for other organisations, like colleges and universities to join the effort. ###newline###  Since the Bank of England s independence in 1997, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has been tasked with achieving price stability, as defined by the government s inflation target. The formation of the MPC was a further evolution of the UK monetary policy framework, following the adoption of an explicit inflation target in 1992. Since 2004, the target has been set as an inflation rate of 2%, measured by the 12-month increase in the Consumer Prices Index (CPI).1 ###newline###  The timing of the reduction in inflation was not coincidental. The framework changes helped address two related causes of the high and volatile inflation in the 1970s and 1980s. A clear remit to target inflation addressed the so-called time inconsistency problem: at any point in time, the temptation to unexpectedly overstimulate the economy, which once anticipated, leads to an inflationary bias.2 And delegating decisions on interest rates to a committee (the MPC) in an independent central bank has helped insulate monetary policy from political influences. Specifically, the risk that the electoral cycle leads politicians to push for extra stimulus ahead of re-election, also creating a tendency towards volatile and above-target inflation.3 Both of these causes stem directly from the interaction between monetary policy and inflation expectations. When people expect that monetary policy will always tend towards providing extra stimulus, they will also expect inflation to increase in future. Higher expectations are likely to then feed into economic conditions today. If those higher expectations are slow to change, they can make it more costly to reduce inflation. Monetary policy may have to be tight for a long period of time, imposing significant costs in the form of lower activity and higher unemployment, before people lower their expectations. ###newline###  People s expectations of future inflation are key influences on current inflation. As such, the MPC closely monitors a range of measures of inflation expectations. Understanding the causes and consequences of movements in those measures is of the utmost importance for policy decisions. Indeed, a range of evidence supports the idea that the reduction in the level and volatility of inflation over the past forty years has come about in large part due to central banks  success in reducing inflation expectations. Inflation expectations affect people s decisions in several ways.4 In turn, these decisions influence everything from the amount of spending in the economy to the wages and prices set by companies. All of which directly or indirectly affect the current rate of inflation. First, if households and companies expect prices to rise more quickly, they are likely to negotiate higher wage increases, and companies are more likely to set higher prices for their goods and services. Second, changes in inflation expectations in financial markets are likely to affect the nominal value of the exchange rate, affecting import prices and CPI inflation. For both of these influences, it is likely to be the inflation expectations of firms and financial markets that matter more than those of households. Individual workers tend to have limited bargaining power in wage negotiations, so household expectations often play little direct role in wage-setting decisions. Perhaps as a result, many studies and discussions have tended to focus on the inflation expectations of companies, professional forecasters and financial markets.5 This evidence, as well as a casual reading of the data, generally suggests a good understanding of the inflation process and of how monetary policy behaves.6 But third, for household spending decisions, household inflation expectations are likely to matter more. For a given level of interest rates, if households expect prices to rise more, that increases their incentive to spend today rather than saving. In other words, higher inflation expectations will reduce the real interest rate, boosting household consumption. The resulting rise in demand relative to supply will tend to push up on inflation. In many of our economic models, this  real interest rate channel  is extremely powerful. In reality, its effects may be mitigated somewhat by the many households who are unable to smooth their consumption across time.7 It may also be harder to identify at the relatively low rates of inflation that we now enjoy in the UK. Nonetheless, it is likely to be important for major purchases of durable goods such as houses or cars, especially at times when inflation expectations pick up markedly. As a result, in addition to any potential effects on the economy, a good understanding of inflation is likely to be useful to households making major financial decisions. A key benefit of low and stable inflation is that it is more predictable. With effective communication, that should have made it easier for households to track, predict and act upon. Public understanding of inflation and trust in monetary policy is also crucial for accountability. MPC members are unelected officials, chosen for their technical expertise, but ultimately accountable to the public. It is therefore crucial that we communicate our inflation target and our policy decisions accessibly to as wide an audience as possible. ###newline###  Households are asked their expectations for the next 12 months and for the longer term (five years ahead). The MPC also monitors a range of other measures of inflation expectations. In recent outturns, professional forecasters  and companies  inflation expectations have remained close to or below their historical averages. Financial market inflation expectations, in contrast, have increased slightly over the past few quarters, especially at longer horizons. Households  short-term inflation expectations have been relatively stable recently, although they have increased since their recent lows in 2016, a period when CPI inflation itself had been close to zero (Chart 3). Households  long-term inflation expectations have also picked up since 2016, with the Bank survey measure increasing to a series high of 3.8% in Q2 (Chart 4). The increase in the Bank survey in the latest datapoint has not been replicated in the other indicators, and there is some evidence that it partly reflects sampling volatility. But the general upward trend is evident across all three surveys since 2016, albeit from historically low levels. Part of the explanation may be that Brexit (more specifically its effect on sterling feeding through to realised CPI inflation) has increased some households  inflation expectations. I will come back to discuss a more nuanced effect of Brexit uncertainty on median expectations later in the speech. Households  inflation expectations are likely influenced by their inflation perceptions: what they think inflation currently is. So the Bank survey also asks households how they think prices have changed over the past 12 months. Chart 5 shows that there is a fairly close relationship between perceptions of price rises over the past 12 months and expectations over the next 12 months, although less so with longer-term expectations. How do household perceptions of price rises compare to the measured CPI data? Chart 6 shows that most households have perceived faster price rises than the actual change in CPI inflation, with the median perception around one percentage point higher on average over the period since 2004 (after the target had changed from RPIX). Household expectations of future price rises are also generally higher than ex-post realised CPI inflation (Chart 7). This is true across surveys, and is perhaps unsurprising, given the close relationship between households  perceptions of inflation and their short-term expectations. It is also clearly evident in longer-term expectations. That difference aside, median household inflation expectations have had mixed success in forecasting future inflation. Chart 8 adjusts expectations in the Bank survey to take account of the average difference between household perceptions and actual rises in CPI. It then compares the adjusted, ex-ante forecast with ex-post realised inflation. The forecast errors show little remaining bias once expectations are adjusted. But the errors are somewhat large and persistent, suggesting that households do not always adjust their expectations even when prices start rising more quickly or slowly than they had expected. Why might households perceive (and expect) higher inflation than measured CPI? Since the survey question does not specify any particular price index, one possibility is that households are not referring to the same basket of goods and services. While the median household perception has been higher than CPI inflation since 2004, it has averaged around the same rate as RPI and RPIX inflation.9 RPI is no longer classed by the ONS as a national statistic, but it is still widely quoted in the media, and importantly, is used to uprate a range of highly visible items such as pensions, rail fares and student loans. It seems possible that despite the MPC s inflation target changing to CPI after 2003, households may have continued referring to RPI/RPIX when answering the survey question. If so, it would suggest an additional benefit to having a single, preferred measure of consumer prices.10 This is not the whole story, however. Compared to either price index, household perceptions and expectations fail to accurately track the observed volatility in the inflation data. The wider economics literature suggests at least three other sets of reasons why households may perceive inflation differently to the aggregate statistics: some psychological; some environmental; or some due to financial literacy. The psychological reasons relate again to which prices respondents are referring to when they answer the question. The ONS s price indices are weighted according to average household spending patterns, but different households will consume different baskets of goods and services. There is no guarantee that even the median respondent faces the same basket as the CPI. Even if they face the same consumption basket, households may show other cognitive biases when answering the question. Households may focus on more visible price changes such as energy and food. Chart 9 shows that UK short-term inflation expectations closely follow petrol prices, a relationship also observed in other countries.11 There is a similar correlation with food prices (Chart 10). Households may also recall personal experiences and place more weight on more salient events. There is evidence that large price changes are more memorable than small ones, and price increases more so than decreases. Similarly, people tend to remember recent and more frequent purchases more easily.12 Chart 9: Inflation expectations and real oil priceChart 10: Inflation expectations and real food price The environmental factor relates to the aggregate level and volatility of inflation. In low-inflation countries, it is less important to know the rate of price inflation.13 When making financial decisions, it is more costly to ignore the effects of inflation when prices are increasing at 20% or 100% per year, relative to when they are increasing at only 2% per year. In the economics jargon, this is an example of rational inattention: the idea that attention is a scarce resource and is allocated to its best possible use. If inflation is not one those uses, it may just reflect the success of the current framework in producing a low inflation environment. According to one opinion survey, less than 10% of people in the UK see inflation or prices as an important issue facing Britain today, compared to over 50% in the 1970s, when inflation was far higher.14 To sum up, there are a number of reasons why household perceptions and expectations of price changes may differ from measured CPI data. It could be that households are referring to a different basket of goods and services, be it a different price index, or a subset of more visible goods. People may rationally opt not to process all the information required to form accurate perceptions and expectations because the benefits do not justify the costs. Or it could be that different levels of financial literacy affect households  understanding of inflation. I next explore these possibilities by looking at disaggregated survey data. ###newline###  Do all households form expectations like the median? The short answer is no. Households  perceptions and expectations of inflation are highly dispersed.16 And some recent research has shown that this distribution may contain additional relevant information about the inflation process.17 Moreover, there are also large differences across demographic groups including gender, age and income. Chart 11 shows the distribution of households  12-month ahead inflation expectations in the Bank survey. It shows that there has consistently been a sizeable fraction of respondents who have expected prices to rise far faster than the Bank s 2% CPI inflation target. Since 2006, an average of one-third of the households who formed an expectation predicted inflation above 4%. In that period, measured CPI inflation has only risen above 4% around 10% of the time and measured RPIX inflation 23% of time. Again, this may just reflect a different inflation basket. This fraction of respondents could devote a greater share of their overall spending to goods and services with higher price rises. Brexit uncertainty may be playing a role. This increase has been clearer still in questions on long-term inflation expectations, where 44% of households now have no idea what inflation will be in five years  time. Irrespective of why it has increased, the proportion of households giving this response is quite large, suggesting that the gap between households  perceptions and reality may partly be due to differences in financial literacy. Disaggregating the surveys according to demographics provides further evidence for this. Starting with gender, a common finding in US studies has been that women have significantly higher inflation expectations than men.18 Interestingly, this does not seem to be the case in the UK (Chart 12), where women s inflation expectations are broadly similar to those of men. There appears to be an important gender divide in responses depending on how the question is framed.19 When asked about  prices in general  in the Bank survey, the distribution of responses between men and women is broadly similar. However, when asked about the  inflation rate  in the Barclays Basix survey, women are much more likely to report that they don t know (Chart 13). This is consistent with findings in other countries and could relate to differences in financial literacy.20 Alternatively, it may relate to evidence from psychological research suggesting that in areas such as finance, men tend to be more overconfident than women.21 Chart 15: One-year-ahead inflation expectations distribution by age, Barclays Basix survey (a) 16-24(b) 55+ Moving on to different age groups, many US studies have found that older generations have higher inflation expectations than younger ones. One theory is that people living through different times have built up different life experiences, which affects their view of the future.22 For example, older generations that can vividly remember the high inflation of the 1970s will report higher expected inflation than younger generations who have only experienced low inflation. In the UK surveys, the picture is mixed. Younger people do report lower expected price rises in the Bank survey, but the opposite is true in the Barclays Basix survey. Asking about the  inflation rate  again exacerbates the gaps among different groups. Older generations  are better able to form expectations and also appear to predict movements in CPI inflation more successfully (Charts 14 and 15). Finally, there are differences according to socioeconomic status, as measured by National Readership Survey (NRS) classification, which ranks households according to the chief income earner s occupation. It therefore captures a mix of income and education. Chart 16 shows that households in lower classifications tend to have higher inflation expectations, which could be due to different consumption baskets (if they consume more of the goods and services that have higher inflation rates). But households in the lowest classification are also far less likely to be able to provide an expectation for future price changes, with around 35% answering  no idea  in the Barclays Basix survey, compared to 15% of the top group (Chart 17). The gap is again larger when asking about the  inflation rate  than  prices , suggesting differences in financial literacy as a factor. ###newline###  So far I have focused on one-year ahead expectations but I would like to briefly touch upon long-term expectations. In our models, it is long-term inflation expectations that matter more for financial decisions. And since short-term expectations tend to be influenced more by volatility in current inflation, households  long-term expectations can often give a cleaner signal of their confidence in the MPC s commitment to bring inflation back to target at an appropriate horizon. In that context, the increase in median long-term inflation expectations in the latest Bank survey   to a series high of 3.8%   may appear concerning. While something we should watch closely, there is some evidence from the individual survey responses that at least part of the increase represents sampling volatility. Consistent with that hypothesis, it has not been replicated in the other surveys we monitor. We should also bear in mind that people generally find it difficult to answer questions about things far into the future: in the latest survey, the number of  no ideas  increases from 19% to 44% as we extend the horizon from one to five years ahead (Chart 19), with a similar pattern evident in the Barclays Basix survey. Let me take stock here. When we look beneath the average, we see that there are specific groups of the population that tend to report price change expectations further from the inflation target and from the official data on CPI inflation. There are also differences in the characteristics of respondents unable to form an expectation of future inflation. These respondents are more likely to be women than men; to be young than old; and to be in low income occupations. ###newline###  When it comes to setting monetary policy, these results call for caution in interpreting movements in median measures of household inflation expectations. Interpreting the median is tricky when there are changes in the number of households who respond that they do not know. This is especially true for long-term inflation expectations, which are typically most relevant for policy. For communicating monetary policy and improving public understanding of the inflation targeting framework, the large fraction of households who are unable to form an expectation of future inflation is a concern, particularly if it is due to a lack of financial literacy. It makes the steps we have been making on the MPC to improve our communications all the more important. For example, since 2017, we have published a visual summary of our Inflation Report, which aims to be accessible to a wide audience.23 More broadly, the Bank of England has been taking steps to improve its educational outreach, as discussed by Haldane (2017), Carney (2018) and recently by Broadbent (2019). Last year my colleagues at the Bank launched econoME, an educational programme designed for young people aged from 11 to 16, which aims to improve economic and financial literacy. The results I have presented today suggest that young people may particularly benefit from improved financial literacy, so improving education for school-age children is crucial. I think that there also remains space to design programmes for slightly older age groups. Here, there is scope for other institutions, like universities, colleges and even employers to help people develop the skills to make more informed choices. I ve talked about a concrete challenge for communications when a significant and growing fraction of households do not have a strong understanding of the inflation process. Today the challenge is made more difficult by the current economic outlook. Uncertainty is the word dominating the mood. Globally, uncertainty has shown up most clearly in interest rate expectations. Forward rate expectations have fallen in recent months, with market participants now expecting an imminent rate cut in the United States and a continued looser policy stance in the euro area. Risky asset prices had also weakened, although those  falls have likely been cushioned by lower risk-free rates. Increases in trade tensions have been one source of heightened uncertainty, adding further downside risks to a global economy where growth had already slowed over the past 18 months. And a further weakening in sentiment has been evident in output surveys, particularly in manufacturing. The change in sentiment is hard to reconcile with standard trade models, which would predict small direct effects of the tariffs announced so far on large economies such as the US. It is possible that sentiment is responding to broader risks or indirect spillovers not captured in our models. Some of the moves in risk-free curves are also no doubt related to a weaker global inflation outlook. Despite increases in wage growth, core inflation has remained subdued in the US and in euro area, increasing market expectations of looser monetary policy. Unlike in the UK, there have been large falls in financial market measures of inflation expectations in both regions. Domestically, Brexit uncertainty continues to play a key role in financial market pricing, as set out recently by Carney (2019). As the perceived likelihood of a no-deal Brexit has risen, pricing has more clearly diverged with the MPC s forecast assumption of a smooth transition to a new trading arrangement. Sterling has depreciated and market-implied Bank Rate expectations now suggest that the next move will be a cut. But those expectations average across a range of very different Brexit scenarios   with markets expecting looser policy (and a weaker pound) in a no deal scenario. The MPC has explained how in the event of a disorderly exit, the monetary policy response will depend on the balance of the effects on supply, demand and the exchange rate. As I set out in March, in my view it is more likely than not that the appropriate response would be a loosening, but this is by no means certain. The fall in UK yields is not solely due to perceived changes in the probabilities of different Brexit outcomes. Increased trade tensions and weaker global sentiment are also likely to have spilled over to the UK. Brexit uncertainty has also injected volatility into the outlook for UK activity, with stockpiling responsible for part of the strong growth figure in Q1, which looks likely to give way to a far weaker outturn in Q2. But the labour market remains tight: employment and hours worked growth have been strong (although average hours seem also to have been boosted by stockpiling in the manufacturing sector). So too has unit labour cost growth, even if wage growth is showing signs of slowing slightly from its 2018 pace. And conditional on a smooth Brexit scenario, a healthy labour market should continue to support household consumption. Moreover, although measures of core inflation remain subdued relative to labour costs, they have been stable in recent months. Nor are there many signs of weakness in the UK data on inflation expectations. As a result, I still expect that in a smooth Brexit scenario, a small amount of policy tightening will be required over the forecast period to keep demand growing in line with supply. As for the timing of any tightening; with inflation currently at 2% and likely to fall temporarily below target in the coming months, I did not feel compelled to vote for a policy change at our June meeting. If a Brexit agreement is reached, sterling is likely to appreciate, especially given the prospect of relatively looser monetary policy abroad. A stronger pound would serve to dampen import price growth, moderating upward pressure on CPI inflation from strong labour cost growth. Coupled with signs of a weaker global outlook, recent developments likely lengthen the period until there is a sufficient pickup in inflationary pressures for me to vote to raise Bank Rate. I do not currently anticipate such a pickup in the next few months. As always, this is my expectation, not a promise. As the data evolve, so too may my view of the appropriate policy setting. If so I will strive to communicate any change in my thinking to economists, to financial markets, and importantly, to the general public.