 I would like to thank Rodrigo Guimaraes, Jochen Schanz, Charlotte Adams and Chuan Du for excellent research assistance, and others for helpful comments. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. ###newline###  But no central bank believes that giving no guidance on its future strategy is sensible just because it avoids ever having to change that guidance. The question is not whether to give any guidance but rather: what is the most useful way for a central bank to provide information about the way in which it will set monetary policy? That is the question I want to consider. And I want to do so by reference to the experience of the Bank of England. ###newline###  August 2013 saw the introduction of more explicit guidance from the Monetary Policy Committee at the Bank of England about the future course of policy.  As in many other countries, monetary policy in the UK materially further. I saw the advantage to this was that it made clear that a couple of quarters of growth at or above trend would not be enough in itself to make a tightening in monetary policy appropriate. There would probably still be slack in the economy. So the guidance was this: there will be no tightening in policy until a simple measure of slack (unemployment) had fallen materially, at least so long as inflation pressures were not heading in the wrong direction. It was absolutely not an unconditional commitment. What we said was that we would not raise interest rates at least until unemployment fell to 7%, provided the inflation outlook remained benign. And neither did we commit to raise interest rates when unemployment fell to 7% (which it subsequently did fairly quickly). The guidance was effectively a rule we said we would follow until unemployment fell to 7%   and it was a conditional rule. It was somewhat complex precisely because it was not a simple commitment to a specific path. Why did we do it? For me the main reason was to head off risks that after a few decent bits of news on quarterly growth the shorter end of the yield curve steepened in a way that was not justified by the state of the economy The guidance was not given as a means of committing to a policy that we thought optimal but was time inconsistent. I make that point because one argument for guidance that is given at the zero lower bound is that it can make people believe a policy will be followed which involves lower interest rates   and higher inflation   at subsequent points than would be chosen by a central bank that was not constrained by past announcements. In principal that might be helpful as a means to reduce current real interest rates   by raising future inflation expectations. There is indeed a perfectly coherent view that when facing the ZLB the optimal monetary policy may be to commit to generate sufficient future inflation to reduce expected real rates. This could be seen  as committing to being irresponsible  since once the ZLB is no longer binding a purely forward looking central bank would not find it optimal to implement. In this world, forward guidance can be effective in as much as it facilitates commitment, resolving the time inconsistency of the high inflation future path required to deal with the ZLB. 1 But this is not what we at the Bank of England were doing at all. There were two reasons for that. First, far from facing a position of an inflation under-shoot and imminent deflation, the UK had experienced a consistent overshoot of the inflation target. Committing to a time inconsistent policy through announcements of future policy may be sensible if the ZLB is accompanied by deflation. This was the case in Japan, the case often mentioned by the main proponents of the commitment view (Woodford, Krugman and Svensson). But as the chart below shows, the UK has actually experienced relatively high inflation throughout most of the ZLB period (and higher than in the US or Euro zone). In Figure 1, I plot the path of CPI inflation in selected regions up to three years (36 months) after the point when their official policy rate approached the zero-lower-bound. In fact, in the UK our concern has been not to let inflation and inflation expectations become de-anchored from the 2% target. The last thing we wanted to do was to make people believe we were committed to an inflation overshoot in the future!. A second reason why we should not have given guidance to commit to a lower path of rates than we might subsequently prefer is that I do not believe that unconventional monetary policy is powerless at the ZLB. There are means beyond changing the policy rate of making policy more expansionary. So, even if inflation had not been as high as it was, and if deflation concerns had been higher, I believe we had effective tools to further loosen the stance of policy. Even though the effects of assets purchases (quantitative easing, or QE) are quite uncertain, and there is substantial debate about the mechanisms through which it can operate, I believe we had evidence to be more optimistic about monetary policy at the ZLB than the Woodford view. I also believe the international experience with unconventional monetary policy tools has vindicated that less gloomy view of monetary policy at the ZLB. (See Bernanke (2002), Bernanke & Reinhart (2004) and Bernanke, Reinhart & Sack (2004).  For a recent overview of the evidence for the UK see Joyce, Miles, Scott and Vayanos (2012), and other papers in that special edition of The Economic Journal). There are certainly theoretical models   usually where assumptions are made that are comparable to those needed for Ricardian Equivalence   where QE will not work. But to paraphrase Bernanke, QE may be a policy that works in practice but not in (some idealised) theory. So what was the effect of the guidance and what lessons might we take from it? First, despite great efforts some people interpreted our guidance as a promise to set rates at specific levels (that is unchanged) for a specific period. Here are some UK press headlines about our guidance. Second, some people figured out it was not a commitment and then complained that we were being evasive, less than frank, unhelpfully obscure, keeping all our options open, and so on. If you thought we should have been making a commitment for the sort of reasons that Woodford and Krugman thought might be relevant - to commit to a level of rates lower than we might subsequently judge right - I can see that as a valid criticism. But actually the criticism was much less sophisticated than that; it boiled down to  why don t you tell us what you are going to do?  And it is true that the MPC could commit to a certain path for future interest rates, and stick to it whatever economic circumstances materialise. Indeed the more uncertain the economic environment, the more valuable might people find it to have certainty about where interest rates are heading. Yet the greater the uncertainty the greater are the chances that the economic environment will turn out to be very different from what the MPC expected at the time they committed to an interest rate path. And this means that sticking to that path can be very costly. In many models sticking to a particular path for interest rates over a specific horizon can mean that at the end of that horizon interest rate may need to move dramatically to prevent serious instability in the economy. If the certainty about the path of rates for some near horizon comes at the cost of far higher uncertainty a bit down the road that hardly looks ideal. How great is the cost of pre-announcing a path for rates over the next few years? Is that cost greater than the benefits of certainty to households and companies? I have used a simple model of the economy   incorporating several significant sources of uncertainty   to assess that. I want to show some simulations using that model. The model is reduced to the bare minimum2. It has three parts, summarised in three equations, which describe the evolution of output, inflation and supply capacity. Demand and output are assumed to grow faster if interest rates, adjusted for inflation (i.e. real interest rates), are below average. This is a standard demand relation   sometimes called the IS equation. Inflation is assumed to rise when firms produce above their long-run level of supply   in other words there is a link between slack (or spare capacity) and inflation. Finally I assume that supply capacity (more specifically, productivity growth) may respond positively to output growth; this is a simple way of taking account of possible hysteresis effects. I will assume that unless the central bank has committed to a specific path for interest rates it will vary them as it learns about how inflation and output evolve. I assume that the way in which the interest rate responds to inflation and production will be chosen by the central bank optimally in order to achieve its goals (goals which are described below and set out explicitly in my London School of Economics talk). This simple model allows me to incorporate a number of uncertainties that I think are particularly relevant for the UK right now. The first is uncertainty about the degree of spare capacity in the economy. The second is about the impact of monetary policy: since interest rates have been at such exceptionally low levels for so long there is unusual uncertainty about how the return towards more usual levels will affect the economy. The third source of uncertainty is how fast the economy grows in the absence of monetary stimulus (i.e. at a neutral setting for policy). And the fourth source of uncertainty is about the extent to which productivity growth responds positively to output growth. I believe that uncertainty about these four factors   slack, the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, current momentum in the economy, and the endogeneity of productive potential   is substantial and economically significant. I calibrate the model in a fairly crude way to reflect what I think is a plausible view of how these economic relationships operate, and of how large the associated uncertainties are. I specify the aim of the central bank as being to try to keep inflation close to a target and output close to its estimate of the supply capacity of the economy. More specifically, I assume that the central bank sets policy to minimise the expected value of the weighted sum of squared deviations from the inflation target and from supply capacity over a horizon stretching many years into the future. We can then compute an optimal policy rule showing how the interest rate should respond to the (uncertain) evolution of actual inflation and output so as to best achieve the aims of policy. What we are doing here is finding that interest rate rule which best achieves the aims of policy and where the rule is chosen at the outset when there is uncertainty about the economic environment.  Using this rule we can then show how policy would evolve for any specific realisation of the uncertain parameters which affect the path that inflation and output actually take. This yields a range of paths for output, inflation and interest rates; each path is the outcome for a specific constellation of the uncertain factors incorporated in the model. Figure 2 shows the resulting probability distributions for the path of Bank Rate3. Along the central path (that is the median where 50% of the outcomes are with lower interest rates and 50% have higher rates) the level of Bank Rate rises gradually. But it remains materially below its pre-crisis average of around 5% even after four years. Figure 2 also shows that things may turn out quite differently from the central path. This simple model suggests that there is a 10% chance that the appropriate level of Bank Rate increases to above 5% within 18 months (the line labelled  90th percentile ). It also shows that there is a 10% chance that the appropriate level of Bank Rate is around zero for two years to come and is only just over 1% even four years ahead (the line labelled  10th percentile ). How does a policy of fixing the interest rate for a 3 or 4 year horizon look in the light of this model? Not very attractive I should say. Suppose that interest rates are set at the outset so that they follow the central (median) path. On average this is an appropriate policy   but in the light of how things actually evolve it could be very different from the interest rate that would be appropriate based on what actually happens to inflation and output. How wrong could it be? Well 4 years ahead the interest rate to which the central bank commits at the outset if it fixes policy at what is (ex ante) the average outcome could, with about 10% probability, be at least 2.5 percentage points too low and with 10% probability it could be at least 2 percentage points too high. Having interest rates that far from the right level, and for an extended period, seems to me a very high price to pay for the certainty of following a given path for interest rates. It would probably generate outcomes that were wildly unstable. Self-evidently uncertainty around the future economic environment is very significant. This is why most MPCs meet regularly to assess the latest developments and, if necessary, to adjust the stance of monetary policy. The commitment to a particular interest rate path is, it seems to me, unlikely to be the answer to the question of what sort of guidance to give on policy. Yet people who ask what interest rates will be in a few years  time are likely to be disappointed if all they are told is that it might be not much different from today, but it could be around 5%, or somewhere between the two, or maybe even outside that range. So what is the right sort of information   the right sort of guidance   to give? ###newline###  Economic theory is not terribly helpful on this question. Partly that is because many models assume agents (households, companies and the central bank) share the same information and have the same model of the economy in mind. In stylised models of the economy where the central bank and the general public have exactly the same information about the structure of the economy   and make the same assessment of the nature of uncertainty   then everyone can work out what the central bank will do in various circumstances so long as the central bank explains what exactly the aim of policy is, including about how trade-offs between goals are evaluated. The central bank could specify some reaction function   that is a description (or rule) for how it would set interest rates depending on how the economy evolves. But in a model which assumes perfectly rational, computationally proficient and equally informed people, they could work out for themselves the rule the central bank would follow to best achieve its objectives. If one weakened that assumption on common knowledge then providing a monetary policy reaction function can be a useful form of guidance. But in practice the conclusion that the central bank needs to either simply be explicit about its aims or provide a policy reaction function is not very helpful because it ignores several very significant real world complications: Central banks will have different information about the economy than other agents   not so much in terms of having more raw data (though that will certainly be a factor) but more in terms of the scope to analyse it in an institution that has a small army of people trained to interpret data Central banks will use various models of the economy   all of them imperfect and none used as sole guide to policy. The use of such models in setting policy is part science and quantifiable (in the sense that an explicit policy rule could in principle be codified and shared) and part judgement   which is much more difficult to codify in a useful way. Coming up with a reaction function that is a good approximation to the actual decision making procedure and can also be understood is in practice very difficult. (This is made more complicated if people on the policy Committee don t all agree and if those people change over time). Even if models could all be codified and some policy rules specified, then if they were to be even an approximate guide to actual decisions they would probably be complicated. They might be of the form:  if X, Y and Z happen, and none of A, B or C happen, then policy will be set according to the following (non-linear, dynamic, regularly re-estimated) equation .  The number of people who could understand what that means and find it useful may be very small; the scope to misinterpret it is large4. One is to provide an expected path for the policy rate. But without giving some idea about how likely it is that policy will be close to this path this may not be particularly useful. While making clear there is uncertainty around those paths is simple, quantifying that uncertainty is tricky. One might just draw on the volatility of past interest rates (around some previously expected path) as a guide to uncertainty in the future. Or a stochastic simulation using a monetary policy rule could be used to derive fan charts for the policy rate. That is what figure 2 is. But to construct figure 2 you need the following elements: An assessment of all the random factors (or shocks) that can impinge on the economy and their probabilities A model of how those shocks then impact on the outcome you care about   inflation, growth, output etc. A model for how monetary policy affects those outcomes and can be used to offset the impact of shocks An assessment of what the optimal policy response to such shocks is (which means using 1-3 above to derive a policy rule that maximises some specified target function). If policy is made by a committee you need to reach an agreement on 1-4; if it is a committee with members responsible for their own votes you somehow need to reconcile a unique path of rates (for given realisation of shocks) with individual accountability in an environment where people will take in the MPC s view, it is more likely than not, that CPI inflation 18 to 24 months ahead will be 0.5 percentage points or more above the 2% target; the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) judges that the stance of monetary policy poses a significant threat to financial stability that cannot be contained by the substantial range of mitigating policy actions available to the FPC, the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority in a way consistent with their objectives. different views on the structure of the economy, its current state and the chances of various shocks hitting in the future. The MPC could nonetheless decide to use a mechanical procedure that is some sort of rough approximation to its decision making so as to produce a fan chart for interest rates. That might involve using a model with a policy rule for setting interest rates for any given state of the economy embedded in it. This would be a (pretty crude) approximation to the decision making process of any one member of a Committee. Whether the resulting probability distribution of interest rates was a useful guide to the true chances of interest rates taking on different values is hard to judge. Whether any resulting fan chart of interest rates would be an improvement over a rougher sort of guidance   for example a statement that interest rates are expected to only increase gently from the current level over the next few years   is also unclear. There is no getting around the fact that constructing fan charts of interest rates that represent the MPC s view of the probability of different paths present many problems. It involves, for example, the quantification of the chances of various events happening which may go beyond what can meaningfully be done. The apparent precision of probability statements in a world of uncertainty (not just risk) can be misleading5. Some central banks do provide forecast of the future policy rate. For example, the members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) each provide their central projection of the appropriate Federal Funds rate target at the end of each of the next several years, as well as in the longer run. (These views are represented as individual points on a  dot chart ). FOMC members also provide forecasts for key economic variables   such as output growth, unemployment and inflation   based on their own individual assessment of appropriate monetary policy. It might seem clear that to condition forecasts on policymakers  views on what would be their own future monetary policy response is a better alternative than the Bank of England approach, which has been to use a path for interest rates implied by market prices of money market instruments; and that if risks around that preferred central path can be quantified it provides more useful information than the FOMC dot chart which is just a set of measures of the expected rate. In rather different ways The Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Norges Bank, and the Riksbank attempt to do just this. If the path of interest rates used is a reasonable approximation to the true expectation based on how the Committee will actually make decisions in the future, then this would seem a better option than using a market implied path for interest rates and would avoid some well-known problems of consistency and interpretation. But there is a big if in that statement. ###newline###  The MPC could try to give more information on how it will set policy; it could give some approximation to its future reaction function. But I have argued that an easy to understand reaction function will likely be too crude to accurately reflect how decisions will actually be made   so runs the risk of being more misleading than informative.  It is not self-evident that some approximation to a collective reaction function (even ignoring such issues as different members having different reaction functions) is really helpful to ordinary people in understanding what the prospects are for interest rates. It is very likely that any reaction function the central bank gives will at best be a rough approximation; and the more precise you make it the more people may see it as a rule which will absolutely be followed. This is one aspect of a broader problem with guidance which is the danger that people confuse guidance with commitment, or confuse an expectation with a promise. ###newline###  In an ideal world (and in idealised models) the Central Bank can just explain its objectives; maybe it would also need to describe its reaction function. No more is needed. But unless outsiders have as good information on the economic outlook   and can plug that into the reaction function   then they may be left floundering in attempting to assess the prospects for interest rates. And any reasonable approximation to a reaction function might be very complex. (Indeed it is very likely that it is; otherwise MPC meetings would be mechanical affairs lasting 5 minutes). In light of this I believe that the central bank directly giving some assessment of the likelihood of interest rates following different paths is likely to be helpful, particularly in situations in which past action and communication is not enough to describe new trade-offs in an unusual environment. But constructing an explicit probability distribution for the central bank s own policy rate that is based on the realities of how policy is made and gets across a message that can be widely understood is a major challenge. Attempting to provide a specific central path with fans around it is a complex task, and may go beyond what is feasible and useful. Spurious accuracy is unhelpful. So while I am open minded about whether the MPC should provide fan charts for interest rates, I am not convinced that is clearly a step forward.6 Currently, it might be just as useful   and probably less misleading and possibly even more accurate   to give forms of guidance which are more qualitative, such as:  interest rate rises will probably be gradual and likely to be to a level below the old normal .