 I would like to thank Tom Belsham, Jon Cunliffe, Richard Harrison, Katie Low, Clare Macallan, Roland Meeks, Chris Redl, David Ronicle, Manveer Sokhi, Sophie Stone, Alex Tuckett and Matthew Waldron for their help in preparing this speech. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the other members of the Monetary Policy Committee I intend to cover two topics in this speech. First, I want to explain my recent decision to vote for a bp rate hike. The short answer is that, with spare capacity largely used up and cost pressures rising, I believe the economy no longer needs as much stimulus as previously. Rather, we probably need to move over time to something more like neutral, in order to ensure a sustainable return of inflation to target. The second topic is to explain why   at least from my perspective   any further tightening is likely to be at a gradual pace and to a limited extent. A key point is that  gradual  need not mean  glacial . ###newline###  In the exceptional circumstances since the EU referendum, the MPC has   consistent with our remit   aimed to balance any significant trade-off between the speed at which we intend to return inflation sustainably to the target and the support that monetary policy provides to jobs and activity. In late  and much of , the Committee judged that if interest rates were to follow the market path, then some limited spare capacity would remain over most or all of the -year forecast period (see figure ). Given those expectations of some remaining slack, the MPC was willing to tolerate a more gradual return of inflation to target   well beyond the conventional policy horizon of - months. With continued growth in the economy, spare capacity has fallen further. The MPC s latest forecast, in the February IR, is that (if interest rates were to follow the market path prevailing at that stage) the remaining output gap will close over the next year or so, with the economy subsequently moving into excess demand. As a result, the Committee forecast a gradual pickup in domestic cost growth that would help keep inflation slightly above target two and three years ahead even as currency effects fade (see figures  and ). With the prospect that the output gap will close, the horizon at which we seek to return inflation to target shortens and becomes more conventional. Hence, the MPC judged at the February meeting that, if the economy develops broadly as expected, interest rates would be likely to rise further over time. I share that general outlook. But I expect that capacity pressures   especially in the labour market   will probably be a bit greater than the IR base case, hence reinforcing upward pressures on pay growth and domestic costs. The direct boost to CPI inflation from sterling s depreciation   triggered by the Brexit vote   is starting to fade. CPI inflation remains above our % target but, barring significant new swings in sterling or commodity prices, inflation probably peaked with the .% figure late last year. As always, we shall analyse the recent data carefully. The picture that external cost pressures are now having less impact is broadly in line with the MPC s expectations, and may not have much implication either way for the inflation outlook two or three years ahead   which is the main focus for monetary policy decisions. That medium term outlook is driven mainly by domestic cost and capacity pressures, and these are gradually building. Any remaining slack in the economy is now probably limited. For example, the jobless rate is at a -year low, with short-term unemployment around a record low, and a marked drop in under-employment over recent years. The job vacancy rate is unusually high and indeed is up from a year ago. Taken together, business surveys point to fairly marked labour shortages across the economy (see figure ). With increased competition for labour, the number of job-to-job moves has risen back to pre-crisis norms. In general, measures of costs and domestically generated inflation currently give a somewhat less acute picture of capacity pressures than labour market quantities and surveys of recruitment difficulties. Nevertheless, average earnings growth seems to be picking up above the subdued trends of recent years (see figure ), a message also evident in surveys of pay deals. The remaining shortfall in pay growth relative to pre-crisis trends is roughly mirrored by lower productivity growth. Other guides to domestically generated inflation also have picked up recently. In particular, inflation in CPI components that are not heavily weighted to imports   and more closely reflect domestic costs   is up from about  % YoY on average in - to about  % in Q this year, and is around a target-consistent pace (assuming a normal trend in import prices). Some recent data suggest that the economy may have slowed a little in Q. Indeed, retail sales volumes fell sharply in March, with Q as a whole recording a decline of roughly .% QoQ. The significance of this apparent slowdown is, however, questionable. Economic activity in March, and especially retail sales, was hit by unusually heavy snow. Previous experience suggests that such snow effects typically reverse in the next month or two (see figure ). Moreover, there has been a tendency for the ONS to release soft Q activity data that are subsequently revised up over time. Other consumer guides, for example confidence and mortgage approvals, do not point to softer growth in Q. Business surveys for Q point to steady underlying growth in the economy of  % to % YoY, similar to the last couple of years (see figure ). Consistent with this, broad money and credit growth also are similar to the last few years. Job growth has picked up slightly in recent months and, unlike some of the last few years, employment growth currently is led by full-time employees rather than more insecure forms of work such as temporary jobs or self-employment. More broadly, the economy remains supported by accommodative financial conditions, buoyant global growth and the high return on capital. The latest Credit Conditions survey suggests that the availability of unsecured consumer credit has worsened in recent months, but that availability of mortgage loans (which account for most personal borrowing) continues to ease. With lower spreads, average fixed mortgage rates for new loans in general are little changed from levels prevailing before the recent rate hike (see figure ). Indeed, the average interest rate on existing mortgages is still lower than it was a year ago. The Credit Conditions survey indicates that mortgage spreads are being compressed by competitive pressures as lenders seek to gain market share, perhaps reflecting the expansion of new lenders and very low rates of mortgage arrears. Of course, there are many uncertainties, especially Brexit. The provisional agreements between the UK and EU   on the terms of exit last December and a transition period in March   have probably reduced some near-term Brexit-related uncertainties and downside risks to growth. In turn, sterling has appreciated. The expectations among households and businesses of Brexit s effects may yet change further during and after Brexit negotiations, potentially affecting both activity and asset prices. But overall, I suspect that economic growth in the coming year or two will remain around its recent pace of .%-%, i.e. marginally above potential. Consistent with this, surveys of firms  hiring intentions suggest that labour demand will continue to outstrip labour supply (see figure ). It seems likely that the labour market will tighten further, with unemployment edging down to new record lows, putting further upward pressure on domestic cost growth. Against this backdrop, my vote at the March meeting reflected a preference for an earlier tightening path than implied by the market curve. We do not need to set policy in a way that will create rising spare capacity or higher unemployment. But our foot no longer needs to be so firmly on the accelerator. My vote at subsequent meetings will, as always, depend on the data and analysis of the economy s prospects. Like other MPC members, I do expect that any further tightening will be at a gradual pace and to a limited extent. The  limited  phrase signals that in the next few years our policy rate is unlikely to return to the pre-crisis norm of roughly %. This is because the neutral interest rate has fallen markedly and a material part of that decline seems likely to persist. The economy is affected by the whole term structure of interest rates, but my focus here is on the short-term policy rate. The neutral level of rates appears to have varied considerably over time in both real and nominal terms. During -, just before the financial crisis, the BoE policy rate averaged  % in nominal terms, ranging from .% (in ) to .% (in /). In real terms, the policy rate averaged roughly % (versus CPI inflation), and the economy s behaviour (steady growth and inflation around target) suggests that on average rates were close to neutral. In real terms, interest rates in that pre-crisis period were below the levels of the s and early s, but actually were quite high compared to the last  years or so. Since the financial crisis, the neutral rate appears to have fallen markedly in the UK and other advanced economies. Estimates of the neutral rate are imprecise, but   without wishing to endorse them too strongly   generally suggest that it will be around % for the UK in nominal terms in the next few years, and around zero in real terms with the % CPI inflation target. For example, the gilt curve implies that short rates will rise a little above % over the next  years (see figures  and ), while the survey of UK economic forecasts by HM Treasury suggests that Bank Rate will rise to .% over the next five years (see figure ). Globally, yield curves suggest that nominal rates will flatten off at around  -% in the US, and a little below % in the EA. There is an ongoing debate over the factors behind this recent drop in the neutral rate. It probably partly reflects some deep structural factors in the UK and globally, such as lower productivity growth, demographics, shifts in the relative price of investment, changes in the distribution of incomes, and changes in the riskiness of the economy. And it probably also reflects some cyclical factors both in the UK and globally that may be less persistent, such as fiscal consolidation, relatively wide credit spreads, risk aversion and an emphasis on balance sheet repair after the financial crisis, as well as subdued capital spending. The MPC has largely been a bystander in this process, because the factors that reduced the neutral rate in recent years are outside the MPC s control. Of course, we take account of the drop in the neutral rate, aiming to provide sufficient stimulus   by setting an effective policy rate (including asset purchases) below that neutral rate   to close the output gap and ensure a sustainable return of inflation to target over time. The neutral rate is unlikely to be totally static. Some cyclical factors that were depressing the neutral real rate have already eased somewhat, with lower credit spreads and reduced fiscal headwinds. Private sector deleveraging over - has given way to modest releveraging since then. In turn, market pricing for forward rates in the UK, US and EA has risen a bit since the lows in late .  The consensus for Bank Rate five years ahead has moved between .% and % since mid- and has recently crept up from the low end of that range. However, given the prospect that a sizeable part of that drop in the neutral rate will persist, it seems highly likely that our policy rate in coming years will remain well below that pre-crisis average. That may not be news to people who closely follow yield curves for a living. Our guidance is not intended to prevent markets from finding their own equilibrium. Nevertheless, it seems useful for the MPC to convey that message of a lower neutral rate to households and businesses, who may not follow market pricing so closely, in order to reduce risks of an over-reaction in demand that might occur if people wrongly interpret any rise in interest rates as a sign that rates are heading back to pre-crisis norms. To me this means that if, for the sake of argument, interest rates are going to reach a neutral level of around % over time, then this is unlikely to happen in one go, or even over two or three quarters. Rather, interest rates would be likely to rise in a series of modest and measured steps. At first glance, this might seem surprising. If rates need to rise, why not just get on and do it, rather than drag it out? At present, I see three main reasons why any further tightening is likely to be gradual rather than abrupt. while remaining well below pre-crisis norms   as some cyclical factors that are depressing it fade further, for example through higher productivity growth, stronger global capital spending, shifts in fiscal policy and credit spreads, plus the declining impact on risk aversion of the financial crisis. With slack close to being eliminated, the MPC would need to track that movement in the neutral rate upwards to maintain the existing policy stance, just as the Committee allowed for the drop in the neutral rate in its policy setting over recent years. The second is that structural estimates of the output gap are probably more uncertain than usual, and we don t at present need to move too quickly to a neutral stance. As noted previously, there are signs that the labour market is tight and that pay growth is picking up. Nevertheless, this follows several years when pay growth generally undershot consensus and BoE forecasts, even while unemployment fell more than expected. Those undershoots in pay cannot be fully explained by lower productivity growth and inflation expectations. The MPC s judgement is that the Phillips curve has shifted down, reflecting factors including improved education attainment, changes to the tax and benefit system, more widespread under-employment, the expansion of insecure forms of employment, and a hangover of job insecurity from the recession (see figure ). Taking account of this, we have lowered our estimate for the equilibrium jobless rate (U*) from % to  % in early  and to  % in the February  IR. With the jobless rate already at .%, and no evidence of significant spare capacity in firms, that U* estimate implies there is little slack in the economy at present. Indeed, given that U* estimate, in my view there appears to me to be a slight upside risk to our forecasts for pay growth and unit labour cost growth in the next year or two, because the jobless rate seems more likely to undershoot than overshoot our forecasts (reflecting slightly higher economic growth and/or slightly lower workforce growth). However, uncertainty over that U* estimate (and the overall extent of spare capacity) is quite high. The OECD currently estimate that U* is slightly above %, but their U* estimates have often been revised by a percentage point or so either way and in recent years have tended to be revised down (see figure ). Personally, I am fairly confident U* is below %, given that the UK jobless rate has been below % since late- with only a modest pickup in pay growth. I agree with  % as a central estimate for U*, but it is not inconceivable that U* is lower (or will fall further over time). After all, the jobless rate has been below % in SE England since mid-, and in SW England since mid- (recently also East England and Northern Ireland) without, so far, strong pay growth in those regions. Indeed, some might argue that estimates of U* and the output gap are too unstable to predict wage growth and inflation pressures over the horizon the MPC care about. There will inevitably be considerable uncertainty about this until we see a sustained period in which low unemployment does produce the expected pickup in pay and unit labour cost growth. What this means in practice is that we look at a range of data   surveys and cost and price data as well as labour market quantities   to inform our view of spare capacity, and do not treat any one structural estimate as a certain guide to policy. Moreover, our view of spare capacity should evolve gradually in response to data, acknowledging the risk that noise can be interpreted as signal. You could think of this as constructing a best estimate of the output gap from a range of variables, including cost and price data, and setting policy in accordance with that. Hence if, for the sake of example, the growth of pay and unit labour costs were to show a sustained further pick up over time   in line with our forecasts   and other indicators continue to point to a tight labour market, then I would become more confident that there is little spare capacity and the case for moving to a neutral stance would gradually strengthen. This, like the possibility of a gradual rise in the neutral rate, could produce a gradual tightening path even if the Committee does not have a particular preference for gradualism. We have reasonable estimates, based on historic experience, of how the economy usually reacts to policy rate changes (see Figure ). These effects operate through a range of channels, including cash flow effects on debtors, intertemporal substitution among consumers and businesses, changes in asset prices and interest rate expectations and so forth. My central expectation is that these estimates remain valid. However, there is more uncertainty than normal over this, given that it is more than  years since the economy last faced rising rates, in -. The economy s structure has changed in many ways since then. Retail deposit rates, which usually are a little below Bank Rate, fell a little less than the policy rate on the way down because of the perceived zero bound; in order to restore the usual spreads, they may initially rise less in response to increases in Bank Rate. The share of households with a mortgage is down to just % from % in , the lowest for over  years (see figure ). This ratio has fallen more in the UK over this period than any other EU country. The share of households that have a mortgage and also have low levels of liquid assets has fallen from % in  to % in . These trends may reduce the impact of changing interest rates, because rate moves tend to produce a bigger adjustment in spending among households with a mortgage than among the rest of the population   and especially mortgagors who have relatively low liquid assets. The adjustment to interest rate changes might be slower than previously, given that the share of mortgages with a fixed interest rate has risen from % on average in - to % now and the normal level of mortgage transactions for house purchases is about % lower than it was then. It is uncertain how the psychology of borrowers and lenders will respond to rising rates, given that it is so long since rates have risen and around one quarter of mortgagors have never faced a series of rate rises. Borrowers and lenders might over-react, interpreting even a modest rise in Bank Rate as a sign that interest rates are headed back to pre-crisis norms. Or, even if peoples  interest rate expectations do not change much, their spending decisions may be more sensitive to interest rate rises than previously, for example if people regard any interest rate rise as a precursor to severe weakness in the economy (as in -). Moreover, while fewer households have a mortgage, the share of new mortgages that have relatively high loan-to-income ratios has risen markedly   and hence decisions of whether to borrow may be more sensitive to changes in interest rate expectations. So far, recent evidence does not suggest that monetary policy changes have a bigger effect on the economy than usual. The boost to growth from the mid- easing seemed to be roughly as expected. The pass through to household interest rates from the late- tightening so far has been broadly in line with historic experience, although this has been partly offset by the drop in mortgage spreads noted above. There has been little change in the share of people that believe lower interest rates would be good for themselves or the overall economy, and no repeat of the strains evident in - (see figure ). Household interest rate expectations have risen only modestly, and do not anticipate a return to pre-crisis levels of interest rates (see figures  and ). The balance of households that believe it is a good time to save   a measure that has been quite sensitive to interest rate changes in the past   has risen roughly in line with the trends seen in prior episodes of rising Bank Rate (see figure ). In general, these  policy multiplier  uncertainties favour a gradual approach to interest rate changes. When the impact of changing monetary policy is more uncertain than usual, aggressive interest rate moves would increase the likelihood that inflation ends up a long way from target. Conversely, a gradual adjustment in monetary policy reduces risks of undesirably large deviations in output from potential and inflation from target. In other words, Brainard conservatism applies. Note that uncertainty over the effect of monetary policy changes may not always imply gradualism. For example, if inflation tends to be very persistent, or inflation expectations are not well anchored, then policy probably should be more aggressive in reacting to changes in the outlook. So far, inflation expectations do seem well anchored. But it is important to keep an eye on this issue. Academic research suggests that there may be cases when financial stability arguments imply gradual interest rate changes, to reduce risks of abrupt swings in asset prices or debt service burdens. These issues are not playing a major role in my monetary policy votes at present, other than the general policy multiplier uncertainty noted above. The FPC, rather than the MPC, is the first line of defence against financial stability problems, and the FPC s stress tests for the banking system aim to ensure stability even in the event of sizeable interest rate changes. First, the MPC s guidance of  limited  and  gradual  reflects factors outside our control that affect the economy s behaviour and in turn influence the appropriate monetary policy. Second, the extent to which economic conditions push down on the neutral rate, or imply a case for gradual policy changes, is not fixed and may well vary over time. For example, the appropriate degree of gradualism might weaken somewhat if pay growth rises faster than expected or data increase our confidence that the economy s response to rising interest rates are working as expected (the opposite also applies). Third,  gradual  does not imply that the MPC can only raise rates at a very low frequency, such as once per year. Nor does  gradual  mean that the MPC cannot tighten faster than markets price in. Since BoE independence, the MPC has made four tightening cycles, with rates on average rising by bp over eight months (ie roughly bp per quarter). There is quite a wide range of paths that would qualify as gradual relative to that experience. Fourth,  gradual  does not necessarily mean that the exact timing of rate changes must be totally predictable or signalled in advance. The MPC does not intend to create unnecessary uncertainty, and gives guidance   based on our economic forecasts   on the expected general outlook for interest rates. But I doubt that we will regularly use code words to effectively pre-announce policy decisions from meeting to meeting. Finally, the MPC s forecast that any further tightening is likely to be gradual and limited would not prevent the Committee from responding promptly if needed   I stress, if needed   in the event of a rapid change in the economic outlook. As always, the Committee has tools to react to changing economic conditions as required. Figure . UK   MPC Central Forecasts for the Trade-off at Year  in Successive Inflation Reports Figure . UK   MPC Central Forecasts for the Trade-off at Year  in Successive Inflation Reports